Title: 2604.06946v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.06946v1

Published Time: Thu, 09 Apr 2026 00:52:21 GMT

Number of Pages: 36

Markdown Content:
1

# An empirical study of LoRA -based fine -tuning of large 

# language models for automated test case generation 

Milad Moradi *

AI Research Lab , Tricentis, Vienna, Austria 

m.moradi -vastegani@tricentis.com 

Ke Yan 

AI Research Lab , Tricentis , Sydney, Australia 

k.yan@tricentis.com 

David Colwell 

AI Research Lab , Tricentis, Sydney, Australia 

d.colwell@tricentis.com 

Rhona Asgari 

AI Research Lab , Tricentis, Vienna, Austria 

r.asgari@tricentis.com  

> *

Corresponding author. Postal address: Tricentis GmbH , Leonard -Bernstein -Straße 10 , 1 22 0 Vienna, 

Austria .2

Abstract 

Automated test case generation from natural language requirements remains a challenging 

problem in software engineering due to the ambiguity of requirements and the need to produce 

structured, executable test artifacts. Recent advances in Large Language Models (LLMs) have 

shown promise in addressing this task; however, their effectiveness depends on task -specific 

adaptation and efficient fine -tuning strategies. In this paper, we present a comprehensive 

empirical study on the use of parameter -efficient fine -tuning, specifically Low -Rank Adaptation 

(LoRA), for requirement -based test case and test step generation. We evaluate multiple LLM 

families, including open -source models (DeepSeek -1.8B , Llama -3.1 -8B, and Ministral -8B) and 

proprietary models (GPT -4.1, GPT -4.1 -mini, and GPT -4.1 -nano), under a unified experimental 

pipeline. The study systematically explores the impact of key LoRA hyperparameters, including 

rank, scaling factor, and dropout , on downstream performance. To enable scalable and consistent 

evaluati on, we propose an automated evaluation framework based on GPT -4o, which assesses 

generated test cases across nine quality dimensions, such as semantic similarity, information 

coverage, structural correctness, and hallucination. Experimental results demonstrate that LoRA -

based fine -tuning significantly improves the performance of all open -source models, with 

Ministral -8B achieving the best results among them. Furthermore, we show that a fine -tuned 8B 

open -source model can achieve performance comparable to pr e-fine -tuned GPT -4.1 models, 

highlighting the effectiveness of parameter -efficient adaptation. While GPT -4.1 models achieve 

the highest overall performance, the performance gap between proprietary and open -source 

models is substantially reduced after fine -tuning. These findings provide important insights into 

model selection, fine -tuning strategies, and evaluation methods for automated test generation. In 

particular, they demonstrate that cost -efficient, locally deployable open -source models can serve 

as vi able alternatives to proprietary systems when combined with well -designed fine -tuning 

approaches, offering practical benefits in terms of scalability, customization, and data privacy. 

Keywords: Automated test case generation , Large language models , Parameter -efficient fine -

tuning , Low -rank adaptation , Software test automation , Requirement -based test generation 3

# 1.  Introduction 

1.1.  Background and motivation 

Software testing is a critical yet resource -intensive phase of the software development 

lifecycle [1]. Among testing activities, test case generation is particularly challenging, as it 

requires translating often informal, ambiguous, and incomplete requirements into precise, 

structured, and executable test artifacts [2, 3]. Despite decades of research and industrial practice, 

generating high -quality test cases that are correct, complete, and maintainable remains a largely 

manual task, demanding significant domain expertise and human effort. As software systems 

continue to g row in size, complexity, and release frequency, the limitations of manual test case 

design have become increasingly evident, motivating the need for more effective automation 

solutions [3].

Automated test case generation from requirements faces several inherent challenges. First, 

software requirements are commonly expressed in natural language, which is prone to ambiguity, 

inconsistency, and varying levels of abstraction. Accurately interpret ing requirement intent and 

translating it into concrete test cases and test steps is non -trivial. Second, test cases are structured 

artifacts that must follow specific conventions, including test case names, types, descriptions, and 

ordered test steps with clear preconditions and expected outcomes. Generating such structured 

outputs requires not only language understanding but also adherence to testing best practices. 

Third, practical test case generation must balance coverage, correctness, and readability, ensuring 

that generated tests are both technically valid and useful for human testers and automation 

frameworks. These challenges have limited the effectiveness of traditional automation techniques 

[4-6].

Early approaches to automated test case generation largely relied on rule -based systems, 

templates, and heuristic methods. While effective in narrowly defined domains, rule -based 

techniques suffer from poor scalability and maintainability. They require ext ensive manual rule 

engineering and struggle to generalize across projects, domains, or requirement styles. Even small 

changes in requirement phrasing often necessitate significant updates to the underlying rules [7,

8].

Traditional machine learning approaches, including classical NLP models and supervised 

learning techniques, have attempted to alleviate some of these issues. However, these methods 

typically depend on feature engineering, domain -specific representations, a nd limited contextual 

understanding [9]. As a result, they often fail to capture long -range dependencies in requirements 

or generate coherent, multi -step test procedures. Moreover, conventional ML models generally 4

lack the expressive capacity required to produce rich, structured outputs such as detailed test steps, 

making them insufficient for end -to -end test case generation in real -world settings [10 ].

Recent advances in Large Language Models (LLMs) have fundamentally changed the 

landscape of natural language processing and have opened new opportunities for software 

engineering automation. Trained on massive corpora of natural language and code, LLMs 

demonstrate strong capabilities in und erstanding context, reasoning over complex inputs, and 

generating structured, human -readable outputs. Consequently, they have been successfully 

applied to a wide range of software engineering tasks, including code generat ion, bug detection, 

documentation, requirements analysis, and software testing [11 , 12 ].

In the context of test automation, LLMs offer the potential to directly transform natural 

language requirements into complete test cases, including descriptive metadata and executable 

test steps [13 , 14 ]. However, off -the -shelf LLMs are typically trained as general -purpose models 

and may not perform optimally on specialized downstream tasks such as requirement -based test 

case generation without further adaptation. This has motivated growing interest in fi ne -tuning 

LLMs for software engineering tasks, particularly using parameter -efficient methods that reduce 

computational cost while preserving performance [15 ]. Understanding how different models and 

fine -tuning strategies perform in this domain is therefore essential for advancing practical, 

scalable solutions to automated test case generation. 

1.2.  Problem statement 

The growing adoption of agile and DevOps practices has intensified the demand for rapid 

and reliable software testing, highlighting the need for automated generation of test cases directly 

from software requirements [16 ]. In many industrial settings, requirements are specified in natural 

language and serve as the primary source of truth for defining system behavior. Transforming 

these requiremen ts into high -quality test cases ( comprising a test case name, test case type, test 

case description, and a sequ ence of well -defined test steps) remains a largely manual and error -

prone process [17 ]. This manual effort not only increases development cost but also introduces 

inconsistencies between requirements and test artifacts, particularly in fast -evolving systems. 

From a technical perspective, automated requirement -based test case generation poses a 

complex text -to -structured -artifact transformation problem. Given a requirement name and its 

textual description as input, an automated system must correctly interpret the intended 

functionality, identify relevant test scenarios, and generate structured and logically ordered test 

steps that align with software testing best practices [18 ]. The generated test cases must be 

sufficiently detailed to be actionable, while remaining concise and readable for both human testers 5

and automated testing frameworks. Achieving this level of quality and consistency across diverse 

requirement formulations is a significant challenge. 

LLMs have recently emerged as promising candidates for addressing this problem due to 

their strong natural language understanding and text generation capabilities [19 ]. However, off -

the -shelf LLMs are not optimized for domain -specific tasks such as test case generation. Without 

adaptation, they may produce incomplete test steps, irrelevant scenarios, or outputs that do not 

conform to expected testing structures. Full fi ne -tuning of large models can improve task 

performance but is often computationally expensive, memory -intensive, and impractical for many 

organizations, especially when dealing with models containing billions of parameters [20 ].

This leads to a critical need for efficient and high -quality fine -tuning strategies that can adapt 

LLMs to requirement -based test case generation without incurring prohibitive costs. Parameter -

efficient fine -tuning methods, such as Low -Rank Adaptation (LoRA), offer a promising solution 

by updating only a small subset of model parameters while keeping the base model frozen [21 ].

However, the effectiveness of such approaches depends heavily on the choice of fine -tuning 

configuration and hyperparameters, and their impact varies across different model architectures. 

Therefore, the central problem addressed in this work is twofold: 

1.  how to effectively fine -tune LLMs to automatically generate high -quality test cases and 

test steps from natural language requirements, and 

2.  how to achieve this adaptation efficiently, balancing performance, computational cost, 

and model size. 

Addressing this problem requires a systematic investigation of fine -tuning strategies across 

different LLM families, along with robust evaluation methods to assess the quality of generated 

test artifacts. 

1.3.  Research objectives and contributions 

The overarching objective of this research is to systematically investigate the effectiveness 

of parameter -efficient fine -tuning of LLMs for automated test case and test step generation from 

natural language requirements. While recent studies have demonstr ated the promise of LLMs in 

software engineering tasks [12 , 14 ], there is still limited empirical evidence on how different 

model families and fine -tuning strategies perform for requirement -based test automation, 

particularly under realistic resource constraints. This work aims to close this gap through a large -

scale, methodical experimental study .6

To achieve this objective, we conduct a comprehensive empirical evaluation of LoRA -based 

fine -tuning applied to multiple state -of -the -art LLMs. Rather than relying on anecdotal or single -

configuration results, our study explores a wide range of fine -tuning settings and analyzes their 

impact on the quality of generated test cases. This allows us to better understand how parameter -

efficient adaptation influences model behavior in the context of structured test artifact generation. 

A key contribution of this paper is a comparative evaluation between open -source and 

proprietary models. Specifically, we evaluate several open -source LLMs at the 8B parameter 

scale and compare their fine -tuned performance against fine -tuned GPT -4 models p rovided via 

Microsoft Azure. This comparison provides practical insights into the trade -offs between model 

size, openness, cost, and achievable performance, which are critical considerations for both 

researchers and practitioners. 

In addition, this work presents a systematic exploration of LoRA hyperparameters, including 

rank, scaling factors, and other configuration choices. By analyzing how these parameters affect 

downstream performance, we demonstrate that LoRA configuration is not merely an 

implementation detail but a decisive factor in achieving high -quality results. Our findings offer 

concrete guidance for practitioners seeking to fine -tune LLMs efficiently for similar tasks. 

To support scalable and consistent evaluation, we introduce an automated evaluation 

framework based on GPT -4o, which assesses generated test cases across multiple quality 

dimensions, such as requirement coverage, correctness, completeness of test steps, an d clarity. 

This framework enables large -scale evaluation without the prohibitive cost of exhaustive human 

assessment and provides a reproducible mechanism for comparing different models and fine -

tuning setups. 

Finally, one of the most significant findings of this study is the empirical evidence that a 

fine -tuned 8B open -source model can achieve performance comparable to that of pre -fine -tuned 

GPT -4 models on the task of test case generation. This result highligh ts the potential of smaller, 

open -source models as viable and cost -effective alternatives to large proprietary models when 

combined with well -designed parameter -efficient fine -tuning strateg ies. 

In summary, the main contributions of this paper are: 

• A large -scale empirical study of LoRA -based fine -tuning for automated test case and 

test step generation .

• A detailed comparison of fine -tuned open -source 8B models and fine -tuned GPT -4

models .7

• A systematic analysis of the impact of LoRA hyperparameters on downstream 

performance .

• An automated, LLM -based evaluation framework for assessing test case quality .

• Empirical evidence demonstrating performance parity between fine -tuned 8B open -

source models and pre -fine -tuned GPT -4 models .

Together, these contributions advance the state of the art in LLM -based software test 

automation and provide actionable insights for both research and industrial adoption. 

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the background and related 

work on automated test case generation, large language models, and parameter -efficient fine -

tuning. Section 3 defines the task formulation, dataset, and prompt desi gn used in this study. 

Section 4 presents the methodology, including the experimental pipeline, model selection, and 

LoRA -based fine -tuning setup. Section 5 introduces the automated evaluation framework, while 

Section 6 reports and discusses the experiment al results. Finally, Section 7 concludes the paper 

and outlines key findings and implications .

# 2.  Background and related work 

2.1.  Automated test case generation 

Automated test case generation has long been an active research area in software engineering, 

with requirement -based test generation being one of its most prominent directions [5, 22 , 23 ]. In 

this setting, test cases are derived directly from software requirements to ensure traceability 

between specified behavior and validation artifacts. Early work in this area focused on leveraging 

structured or semi -structured requirements, such as use cases, UML models, or formal 

specifications, to systematically generate test scenarios and test steps [24 , 25 ]. While these 

approaches provide strong alignment between requirements and tests, their applicability is often 

limited by the availability of well -structured requirement models and the effort required to 

maintain them as requirements evolve. 

To overcome these limitations, researchers have increasingly explored Natural Language 

Processing (NLP) and Machine Learning (ML) techniques for test case generation from textual 

requirements. NLP -based methods typically rely on syntactic parsing, keyword extraction, and 

semantic role labeling to identify actions, conditions, and expected outcomes within requirement 

desc riptions [19 , 26 ]. Traditional ML approaches extend this by learning mappings between 

requirement features and test artifacts from historical data [27 -29 ]. Although these techniques 8

reduce manual effort compared to rule -based methods, they often depend on handcrafted features 

and domain -specific assumptions, which restrict their generalization capability. As a result, such 

approaches struggle to generate comprehensive and coherent mul ti -step test cases, motivating the 

adoption of more expressive models such as LLMs in recent research. 

2.2.  Large language models in software engineering 

LLMs have recently gained significant attention in software engineering due to their strong 

capabilities in understanding and generating both natural language and source code [12 , 30 -32 ].

Trained on large -scale corpora that include programming languages, technical documentation, 

and natural language text, LLMs have been successfully applied to a variety of software 

engineering tasks. In code generation, they have demonstrated the ability to synthesize functions, 

complete code snippets, refactor existing code, and assist developers during implementation [33 ,

34 ]. These capabilities have led to increased productivity and have positioned LLMs as effective 

assistants throughout the software development lifecycle. 

Beyond code generation, LLMs have also shown promise in software testing and 

requirements engineering [30 ]. In testing, prior work has explored the use of LLMs for generating 

unit tests, test inputs, test oracles, and test scripts, as well as for test prioritization and fault 

localization [12 , 35 ]. In requirements engineering, LLMs have been applied to tasks such as 

requirement classification, ambiguity detection, requirement summarization, and traceability link 

generation [36 , 37 ]. These studies highlight the potential of LLMs to bridge the gap between 

informal natural language artifacts and structured software engineering outputs. However, 

existing work often relies on pre -trained models with limited task -specific adaptation, leav ing 

open questions regarding the role of fine -tuning and model configuration in achieving reliable 

and high -quality results for specialized tasks such as requirement -based test case generation. 

2.3.  Fine -tuning large language models 

Fine -tuning is a common strategy for adapting pre -trained large language models to specific 

downstream tasks [38 , 39 ]. Full fine -tuning updates all model parameters using task -specific data, 

often resulting in strong performance improvements. However, for modern LLMs with billions 

of parameters, full fine -tuning is computationally expensive, memory -intensive, and difficu lt to 

scale. It requires substantial hardware resources and can be impractical for many organizations, 

particularly when multiple task -specific models must be maintained. Additionally, full fine -tuning 

increases the risk of overfitting when training data i s limited and complicates model deployment 

and versioning due to the need to store and manage large numbers of fine -tuned parameter sets 

[40 ].9

To address these limitations, parameter -efficient fine -tuning (PEFT) methods have been 

proposed, which adapt LLMs by updating only a small subset of parameters while keeping the 

base model frozen [21 ]. PEFT techniques include adapter layers, prefix tuning, prompt tuning, 

and low -rank adaptation, all of which aim to reduce training cost while preserving most of the 

representational power of the pre -trained model [41 ]. By limiting the number of trainable 

parameters, PEFT enables faster training, lower memory consumption, and improved 

reproducibility, making it particularly suitable for industrial and large -scale experimental settings. 

Moreover, PEFT methods allow multi ple task -specific adaptations to be stored and deployed 

efficiently on top of a shared base model. 

Among PEFT techniques, Low -Rank Adaptation (LoRA) has gained widespread adoption 

due to its simplicity and effectiveness [42 ]. LoRA operates by decomposing weight updates into 

low -rank matrices that are injected into sel ected linear layers ( commonly the attenti on and feed -

forward projections) during fine -tuning [43 ]. Instead of learning full -rank weight updates, LoRA 

constrains the adaptation to a low -dimensional subspace, significantly reducing the number of 

trainable parameters while still enabling meaningful task -specific learning. Key hyperparameters, 

such as the rank of the low -rank matrices, the scaling factor, dropout rate, and the choice of target 

modules, directly influence both training dynamics and downstream performance. Consequently, 

understanding and optimizing these parameters is crucial for achieving h igh -quality results, 

especially for complex structured -output tasks such as requirement -based test case and test step 

generation. 

2.4.  Research gaps 

Despite the growing body of research on LLMs in software engineering, several important 

gaps remain. First, there is a lack of systematic comparison across different LLM families for 

requirement -based test case generation. Existing studies often focus on a single model or compare 

a limited number of approaches under varying experimental conditions, making it difficult to draw 

reliable conclusions about relative performance. In particular, there is insufficient empirical 

evidence comparing open -source models and proprietary models under controlled fin e-tuning 

settings. This limits practitioners’ ability to make informed decisions about model selection, 

especially when considering trade -offs between performance, cost, model size, and deployability. 

Second, although parameter -efficient fine -tuning methods such as LoRA are increasingly 

used, the impact of LoRA hyperparameters on downstream software engineering tasks remains 

underexplored. Many prior works adopt default or heuristic parameter settings w ithout systematic 

justification or analysis. As a result, it is unclear how choices such as rank, scaling factor, or target 10 

layers influence model behavior and output quality in structured generation tasks like test case 

and test step generation. Furthermore, automated evaluation methods for generated test artifacts 

are still insufficiently studied. Most existing evaluations re ly on small -scale human assessments 

or coarse -grained metrics that do not fully capture the quality dimensions of test cases, such as 

requirement coverage, logical consistency, and practical usability. This lack of robust, scalable 

evaluation frameworks hi nders reproducibility and slows progress in the field, underscoring the 

need for automated yet reliable assessment approaches. 

# 3.  Task definition and dataset 

3.1.  Problem formulation 

In this work, we formulate automated test case generation as a requirement -to -test 

transformation task. The goal is to automatically generate complete and structured test artifacts 

from natural language software requirements using LLM s. 

The input to the model consists of: 

• Requirement name: a concise textual identifier describing the feature or change 

request. 

• Requirement description: a detailed natural language specification, often including 

acceptance criteria, functional constraints, and expected system behavior. 

Given these inputs, the model is expected to generate the following outputs: 

• Test case name: a concise and descriptive title summarizing the intent of the test. 

• Test case type: a classification of the test (e.g., functional UI, functional API, 

regression, usability). 

• Test case description: a high -level explanation of the test objective and scope. 

• Test steps: a structured, ordered list of executable test steps, typically including 

actions and expected results. 

This formulation requires the model to not only understand the semantics of natural language 

requirements but also to produce well -structured, domain -specific outputs that align with 

established software testing practices. The task therefore combines natur al language 

understanding, structured text generation, and domain adaptation. 11 

3.2.  Dataset description 

The dataset used in this study was collected from an industrial software testing environment, 

consisting of real -world software requirements and their corresponding manually authored test 

cases. Each data instance links a requirement artifact to one associ ated test case, ensuring strong 

traceability between inputs and outputs. The requirements and test cases originate from a test 

management system and cover a wide range of functional scenarios, including UI behavior, API 

interactions, integration logi c, and configuration management .

The dataset is divided into a training set and a test set. The training set contains 2,583 

instances, while the test set consists of 288 instances. Each instance includes a requirement name 

and description paired with a corresponding test case name, test c ase type, test case description, 

and test steps. The requirements are predominantly written in natural language and often include 

acceptance criteria, numbered conditions, and domain -specific terminology. The test cases reflect 

practical testing practices and vary in complexity, ranging from short validation checks to long, 

multi -step procedural tests. 

The dataset primarily targets enterprise software systems, with a strong emphasis on 

functional correctness, user interface validation, API behavior, and system integration. This 

diversity makes the dataset well -suited for evaluating the ability of LLM s to generalize across 

different testing contexts and output granular, structured test artifacts. 

Before fine -tuning, the dataset underwent standard textual preprocessing steps. These 

included normalization of whitespace, removal of redundant formatting artifacts, and cleaning of 

noisy text segments. In addition, special characters, markup tokens, and tool -specific syntax 

originating fr om the test automation platform (such as internal identifiers, UI -specific 

placeholde rs, and system -generated tokens) were removed when they did not contribute 

meaningful semantic information for language model training. This step was essential to prevent 

the model from overfitting to artifacts irrelevant to the downstream generation task. 

After preprocessing, each instance was converted into a consistent input –output format 

suitable for supervised fine -tuning. The resulting dataset provides clean, high -quality training 

signals for learning the mapping from natural language requirements to s tructured test cases, 

while preserving the richness and realism of industrial test documentation. 

3.3.  Prompt and output schema design 

To fine -tune LLM s for requirement -based test case generation, we designed a structured, 

instruction -driven prompt that explicitly defines the task, expected outputs, and domain 12 

constraints. The prompt is consistently applied to every training and evaluation sample to ensure 

uniform learning signals and to minimize ambiguity during both fine -tuning and inference. This 

design follows an instruction -tuning paradigm, enabling the mod els to learn how to map natural 

language requirements to structured and actionable test artifacts. 

The prompt first establishes the role of the model as a “test automation assistant” and clearly 

specifies the input artifacts, namely the requirement name and requirement description. It then 

enumerates the expected outputs in a fixed order: test case name , test case type, test case 

description, and test steps. For each output field, the prompt provides detailed guidance on 

content, level of detail, and formatting. For example, the test case name is required to be concise, 

descriptive, and traceable to the requirement, while the test case type must be selected from a 

predefined set of categories. This explicit constraint helps the model produce consistent and 

standardized outputs that align with real -world testing practices. 

A key aspect of the prompt design is the explicit structuring of test steps. The prompt 

instructs the model to generate step -by -step procedures with clearly ordered actions and 

corresponding system responses or validations. For API -related scenarios, addit ional 

requirements are imposed, such as specifying HTTP methods, endpoints, payloads, headers, and 

expected response codes. This structured guidance encourages the generation of technically 

detailed and executable test steps, rather than high -level or pure ly descriptive text. Furthermore, 

the prompt instructs the model to cover both standard execution paths and relevant edge cases 

derived from the acceptance criteria, while avoiding verbatim copying of the requirement text. 

The prompt also supports the inclusion of domain knowledge as an optional contextual input. 

This allows additional system -specific or organizational information to be injected when 

available, improving adaptability across different projects or environments . Finally, the output 

schema is explicitly defined at the end of the prompt, listing each required field with its 

corresponding placeholder. This enforces a consistent output format across all generated samples, 

which is critical for automated evaluation a nd downstream processing. Overall, this carefully 

designed prompt and output schema play a central role in enabling effective fine -tuning and 

reliable generation of high -quality test cases from natural language requirements. The complete 

prompt is given in Appendix A .13 

# 4.  Methodology 

4.1.  Overview of the experimental pipeline 

This study follows a structured and end -to -end research, development, and experimentation 

pipeline designed to systematically evaluate LLM s for automated test case generation. The overall 

pipeline consists of seven main stages: (1) data processing and preparation, where raw 

requirement –test case pairs are cleaned and transformed into a consistent training format; (2) 

model selection, coverin g both open -source and proprietary LLMs; (3) prompt design and 

engineering, in which a unified instruction -based promp t and output schema are defined; (4) fine -

tuning configuration, including the setup of parameter -efficient fine -tuning mechanisms such as 

LoRA; (5) model fine -tuning, where models are adapted to the downstream task using the 

prepared dataset; (6) evaluatio n configuration, including the design of automated evaluation 

prompts and scoring criteria; and (7) execution of evaluation experiments to assess and compare 

model performance. This modular pipeline allows individual components to be adjusted or 

extended w hile maintaining experimental c onsistency and reproducibility. 

Within this broader workflow, the fine -tuning pipeline itself is composed of four core steps. 

First, the processed dataset is loaded and prepared for supervised fine -tuning, ensuring correct 

alignment between inputs and structured outputs. Second, the fine -tuning configuration is defined, 

focusing on LoRA -specific settings such as target layers and hyperparameters. Third, the LLM is 

fine -tuned using the configured setup, with the base model weights frozen and only the parameter -

efficient components updated. Finally, the fine -tuned model is evaluated using the predefined 

evaluation framework to measure its ability to generate high -quality test cases and test steps. By 

clearly separating the fine -tuning process from the surrounding experimental stages, this 

me thodology supports systematic analysis of model behavior, controlled comparison across 

configurations, and incremental refinement of both models and evaluation strategies. 

The source codes, data, experimental configurations , and supplementary materials are 

available online at:  https://github.com/mmoradi -iut/LoRA -LLM -FineTuning .

4.2.  Models under study 

This study evaluates a diverse set of LLM s to investigate the effectiveness of parameter -

efficient fine -tuning for automated test case generation. The selected models include both open -

source models, which can be deployed and fine -tuned locally, and proprietary models, which are 

accessed through commercial cloud platforms with built -in fine -tuning capabilities. This 

combination enables a comprehensive comparison across different model architectures, parameter 14 

scales, and deployment paradigms, prov iding insights into performance -cost trade -offs and 

practical adoption considerations. 

4.2.1.  Open -source models 

To evaluate the performance of locally deployable models under controlled fine -tuning 

settings, we selected three representative open -source instruction -tuned models with 

approximately 8 billion parameters or comparable reasoning capacity. These models wer e chosen 

due to their strong performance in general language understanding and generation tasks, 

availability for local fine -tuning, and architectural diversity. 

DeepSeek [44 ]

We used a dense model with approximately 1.78 billion parameters, derived from a Qwen -

based architecture and distilled from a DeepSeek R1 reasoning model using chain -of -thought 

data. The model follows a decoder -only dense transformer architecture inherited from Qwen and 

was further improved through reinforcement learning and knowledge distillation techniques. 

Despite having fewer parameters than the other models studied, it incorporates reasoning -oriented 

training signals, which makes it an interesting cand idate for structured generation tasks such as 

test case creation. The model supports a maximum context window of 32,768 tokens, enabling it 

to process relatively long requirement descriptions and structured prompts. 

Llama [45 ]

We employed the Llama -3.1 -8B -Instruct model, which contains approximately 8 billion 

parameters and uses an auto -regressive decoder -only transformer architecture. The model was 

pre -trained on roughly 15 trillion tokens of multilingual text and code data and subsequently fine -

tuned using supervised fine -tuning and Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) 

[46 ]. Llama -3.1 provides strong instruction -following capabilities and supports a large context 

window of up to 128K tokens, making it suitable for tasks involving long inputs and structured 

outputs. Its balance between performance and computational efficiency makes it a widely adopted 

baseline for research and industrial applications. 

Mistral [47 ]

We also evaluated the Ministral -8B -Instruct model, which contains approximately 8 billion 

parameters and is based on a dense decoder -only transformer architecture enhanced with 

Grouped -Query Attention (GQA) [48 ] and interleaved sliding -window attention mechanisms. 

These architectural optimizations improve memory efficiency and long -context handling while 

maintaining strong generation quality. The model supports a 128K token context window and was 15 

pre -trained on multilingual, code -rich web -scale datasets, followed by instruction tuning to 

improve task -following behavior in conversational and structured generation scenarios. Its 

efficient architecture and strong performance make it a compelling candi date for parameter -

efficient fine -tuning experiments. 

4.2.2.  Proprietary models 

In addition to open -source models, we evaluated models from the GPT -4.1 family, accessed 

through Microsoft Azure’s managed fine -tuning infrastructure. These models represent state -of -

the -art proprietary LLM s with advanced instruction -following, reasoning, and coding capabilities. 

The GPT -4.1 family includes three variants with different performance –latency trade -offs: 

• GPT -4.1: the full -size flagship model with the highest capability. 

• GPT -4.1 -mini: a mid -sized variant designed to balance performance and cost. 

• GPT -4.1 -nano: a lightweight variant optimized for low latency and efficiency. 

A key distinguishing feature of the GPT -4.1 family is its extremely large context capacity of 

up to 1 million tokens, which substantially exceeds that of most open -source models. These 

models also provide improved instruction adherence, reasoning ability, and code understanding 

compared to earlier generations such as GPT -4o. Furthermore, the GPT -4.1 family offers 

improved cost efficiency relative to prior proprietary models, making them more practical for 

enterprise -scale applications. 

By including multiple GPT -4.1 variants alongside open -source models, this study enables a 

comprehensive comparison between locally fine -tuned models and cloud -based proprietary 

models, highlighting differences in scalability, performance, and deployment co nsiderations for 

automated test generation tasks. 

4.3.  Parameter -efficient fine -tuning with LoRA 

To efficiently adapt LLM s to the requirement -based test case generation task, this study 

employs LoRA [42 ], a widely used parameter -efficient fine -tuning technique. Instead of updating 

all model parameters during training, LoRA introduces a small number of additional trainable 

parameters into selected layers of the network while keeping the original pre -traine d weights 

frozen. This approach significantly reduces computational cost, memory consumption, and 

training time, making it particularly suitable for fine -tuning billion -parameter models on domain -

specific tasks with limited hardware resources. 16 

4.3.1.  LoRA mechanism 

The core idea behind LoRA is that the task -specific weight updates required to adapt a pre -

trained model often lie in a low -dimensional subspace. Rather than learning full -rank updates for 

large weight matrices, LoRA decomposes the update into two smaller matrices with reduced ran k. 

Specific ally, for a given weight matrix W, LoRA in troduces two trainable matrices A and B such 

that the adapted weight becomes: 

𝑊 ′ = 𝑊 + ∆𝑊 = 𝑊 + 𝐵𝐴 

where  𝐴 ∈ ℝ𝑟 ×𝑑  and  𝐵 ∈ ℝ𝑘 ×𝑟 , and r is the rank hyperparameter with  𝑟 ≪ min (𝑑 , 𝑘 ). During 

training, only the low -rank matrices A and B are updated, while the original weight matrix W

remains unchanged. This dramatically reduces the number of trainable parameters while still 

enabling the model to learn meaningful task -specific adaptations. 

In transformer -based language models, LoRA is typically applied to linear projection layers, 

particularly those in the attention mechanism (e.g., query, key, value, and output projections) and 

sometimes feed -forward layers. By injecting low -rank adapters i nto these components, the model 

can effectively adjust attention patterns and representation transformations to better align with the 

downstream task. An additional scaling factor is used to control the magnitude of the low -rank 

update during training, hel ping stabilize optimization. Because LoRA modules can be easily 

attached and removed, multiple task -specific adapters can be maintained without duplicating the 

full base model, enabling efficient experimentation and deployment. 

4.3.2.  Tuned LoRA parameters 

The effectiveness of LoRA depends strongly on the choice of hyperparameters that govern 

the capacity and behavior of the low -rank adaptation. In this study, we systematically explored 

several key LoRA parameters to identify configurations that yield optima l performance for 

automated test case generation. 

The first parameter is the rank ( r), which determines the dimensionality of the low -rank 

matrices and directly controls the expressive capacity of the adaptation. Higher ranks allow the 

model to learn more complex task -specific transformations but increase the number of trainable 

parameter s and computational overhead. Lower ranks improve efficiency but may limit 

adaptation capability. We experimented with multiple rank values to evaluate the trade -off 

between performance and efficiency. 

The second parameter is the scaling factor ( α), which controls the magnitude of the LoRA 

update relative to the frozen base weights. The scaling factor effectively rescales the learned low -17 

rank matrices during training and inference, influencing training stability and convergence 

behavior. Proper tuning of this parameter is important to ensure that the adaptation neither 

overwhelms the base model nor becomes too weak to capture task -specific patterns. 

The third parameter is the LoRA dropout, which applies dropout to the low -rank adaptation 

during training to improve generalization and reduce overfitting, particularly when training data 

is limited. Dropout introduces stochastic regularization, encouragin g the model to rely on robust 

patterns rather than memorizing specific training examples. 

By systematically varying these parameters across different models, we were able to analyze 

how LoRA configuration influences downstream performance. This investigation provides 

insights into the relationship between parameter -efficient adaptation capacity and task -specific 

generation quality, which is critical for practical deployment of fine -tuned LLMs in software 

testing environments. 

4.4.  Fine -tuning setup 

This subsection describes the training configuration and computational environment used to 

fine -tune the LLM s in this study. The setup was designed to ensure stable optimization, efficient 

resource utilization, and reproducibility across multiple experimental runs while accommodating 

the constraints of parameter -efficient fine -tuning. 

Training configuration 

All open -source models were fine -tuned using supervised instruction tuning with the 

processed requirement -test case dataset. The training process was conducted for 10 epochs, using 

a per -device batch size of 2 and gradient accumulation of 16 steps, resulting in an effective batch 

size of 32 samples per update. Mixed -precision training with FP16 was enabled to reduce memory 

consumption and accelerate computation. Model evaluation during training was performed 

periodically every 200 steps to monitor learning progress and detect potential overfitting. 

The optimization process used the Adam opti mizer with a learning rate of 1× 10⁻⁶ and a 

weight decay coefficient of 0.01. These conservative hyperparameter choices were selected to 

stabilize training when adapting large pre -trained models using LoRA while preventing 

catastrophic forgetting of the base model knowledge. The loss func tion used during training was 

the standard autoregressive cross -entropy loss over the generated output tokens. 

For parameter -efficient adaptation, LoRA modules were injected into selected transformer 

layers, and several configurations were explored to evaluate their impact on downstream 

performance. Specifically, we experimented with LoRA rank values of 16 and 32, scaling factors 18 

(α) of 8, 16, and 32, and dropout rates of 0.1 and 0.5. These parameter ranges were chosen to 

balance adaptation capacity and regularization strength while maintaining computational 

efficiency. The training dataset consisted of 2,583 samples, while 288 samples were reserved for 

testing. N o additional data augmentation was applied, and samples were shuffled during training 

to improve generalization. 

Hardware and software environment 

All experiments involving open -source models were executed on Microsoft Azure Machine 

Learning (Azure ML) infrastructure using a virtual machine equipped with an NVIDIA H100 

GPU, 40 CPU cores, 320 GB of system memory, and 128 GB of disk storage. The use of a high -

performance GPU enabled efficient fine -tuning of multi -billion -parameter models under mixed -

precision settings and gradient accumulation. Proprietary GPT models were fine -tuned using 

managed cloud -based infrastructure provided through Azure service s, which abstracts the 

underlying hardware configuration while ensuring scalable and reliable training. The GPT -4.1 

models were fine -tuned using the default configurations set by the Azure OpenAI model foundry. 

The experimental pipeline was implemented using modern deep learning tooling for LLM s, 

including PyTorch -based training frameworks and libraries supporting transformer architectures 

and parameter -efficient fine -tuning. This combination of hardware and software infrastructure 

enabled consistent experimentation across multiple models and Lo RA configurations while 

maintaining reproducibility and efficient resource utilization. 

# 5.  Automated evaluation framework 

Evaluating the quality of automatically generated test cases is inherently challenging due to 

the complexity and subjectivity involved in assessing software testing artifacts. Unlike many 

natural language generation tasks, requirement -based test case gener ation does not always have a 

single correct output; multiple valid test cases can satisfy the same requirement while differing in 

structure, wording, or level of detail. To address this challenge and enable large -scale 

experimentation, we developed an auto mated evaluation framework that leverages advanced 

LLM s to assess generated outputs across multiple quality dimensions. This section presents the 

motivation, methodology, evaluation criteria, and scoring strategy used to systematically compare 

model performance in our experiments. 19 

5.1.  Motivation for automated evaluation 

A primary challenge in evaluating generated test cases is the absence of a unique ground 

truth. In practical software testing environments, different testers may produce equally valid test 

cases for the same requirement, varying in terminology, ordering of steps, or granularity of 

validation. Traditional evaluation metrics that rely on direct co mparison with reference outputs, 

such as exact match or token -level similarity, are therefore insufficient for capturing the true 

quality of generated test artifacts . Effective evaluation must instead consider semantic 

correctness, requirement coverage, clarity, and adherence to testing best practices, which are 

difficult to measure using conventional automated metrics. 

Another major limitation is the reliance on manual human evaluation, which is time -

consuming, expensive, and difficult to scale. Human assessment requires domain expertise and 

careful review of each generated test case against the requirement specification , making it 

impractical for large experimental studies involving multiple models and fine -tuning 

configurations. Manual evaluation also introduces potential inconsistencies due to subjective 

judgment across evaluators. These challenges motivate the need fo r a scalable, consistent, and 

reproducible evaluation approach. 

Recent advances in LLM s provide an opportunity to address these issues by using LLMs 

themselves as evaluators. Modern models demonstrate strong capabilities in reasoning, semantic 

comparison, and structured judgment tasks, enabling them to assess generated outputs against 

requi rements using predefined criteria. By leveraging these capabilities, automated evaluation can 

approximate expert judgment while significantly reducing cost and effort. Consequently, this 

work adopts an LLM -based evaluation strategy to support comprehensive and efficient 

comparison of fine -tuned models for automated test case generation. 

5.2.  GPT -4o -based evaluation method 

To enable scalable and consistent evaluation across multiple models and configurations, we 

adopted a LLM -based evaluation approach, using GPT -4o as an automated judge. GPT -4o was 

selected due to its strong reasoning ability, instruction -following performance, and demonstrated 

effectiveness in comparative evaluation tasks involving structured outputs. In this framework, 

GPT -4o receives the requirement, the model -generated test case, and the corresponding human -

authored reference test case, and produces struc tured evaluation scores across predefined criteria. 

The evaluation process is implemented through a deterministic chat -completion call with 

temperature set to 0 and top -p equal to 1, ensuring consistent scoring behavior across repeated 

runs. The model is instructed through a system prompt that defines its r ole as an expert automated 20 

evaluator in software testing, followed by a user prompt containing detailed evaluation 

instructions and the input artifacts. The evaluation prompt explicitly defines the context, scoring 

scale, criteria definitions, and required output format. By constrai ning the output to a JSON -style 

dictionary containing numeric scores, the framework supports automated parsing and downstream 

aggregation without manual intervention. This design ensures reproducibility, minimizes 

response variability, and enables efficien t evaluation of large numbers of generated test cases. 

Importantly, GPT -4o is not used to replace human judgment entirely but rather to 

approximate expert -level assessment at scale. Prior research has shown that strong LLMs can 

serve as reliable evaluators when provided with well -defined criteria and structure d prompts [49 -

52 ]. In our context, the model’s ability to reason about semantics, structure, and technical 

correctness makes it particularly suitable for evaluating requirement -based test artifacts. 

5.3.  Evaluation criteria 

The evaluation framework assesses generated test cases using nine complementary criteria, 

designed to capture multiple dimensions of quality relevant to software testing. These criteria 

extend beyond simple textual similarity and focus on semantic correctn ess, completeness, clarity, 

and practical usability. 

• Semantic Similarity evaluates how closely the overall meaning and intent of the 

generated test case align with the reference test case, emphasizing conceptual alignment 

rather than lexical overlap. 

• Information Coverage measures how comprehensively the generated output captures 

important details such as preconditions, actions, expected outcomes, and edge cases. 

• Critical Content Match asse sses whether essential elements such as roles, system 

components, data attributes, or UI elements are correctly preserved. 

• Structural and Format Accuracy evaluates whether the output follows the expected 

structure, including a clear title, type classification, and logically ordered test steps. 

• Omission measures the extent to which important information is missing, with higher 

scores indicating minimal missing content. 

• Hallucination assesses whether the generated test case introduces unsupported or 

irrelevant information not grounded in the requirement or reference. 

• Ambiguity evaluates the clarity and precision of the language used, focusing on whether 

the test case can be easily understood and executed. 

• Redundancy measures the degree of unnecessary repetition, with higher scores 

indicating concise and well -organized outputs. 21 

• Diversity and Novelty captures whether the generated test case introduces valid 

alternative interpretations or improvements beyond the reference while remaining 

logically sound. 

Each criterion is scored on a 0 –100 ordinal scale, where 0 indicates completely missing or 

incorrect content and 100 indicates excellent quality. This multi -dimensional evaluation provides 

a more comprehensive assessment than single -metric approaches and allows fine -grained analysis 

of model strengths and weaknesses. The prompt used for the automated evaluation is presented 

in Appendix B .

5.4.  Scoring and aggregation strategy 

For each generated test case, GPT -4o produces a dictionary containing nine scores 

corresponding to the evaluation criteria. These scores are then aggregated to compute overall 

performance metrics for individual samples, models, and experimental configurations. 

Specifically, the per -sample score is calculated as the arithmetic mean of the nine criterion scores, 

providing a normalized quality measure between 0 a nd 100 . This averaging approach ensures that 

no single criterion dominates the evaluation while sti ll reflecting overall generation quality. 

At the model level, performance is summarized by computing the mean score across all test 

samples in the evaluation dataset. Additional descriptive statistics, such as standard deviation, can 

be used to analyze variability across samples. For comparative e xperiments, aggregated scores 

enable direct ranking of models and fine -tuning configurations, supporting systematic analysis of 

the impact of LoRA parameters and model architecture choices. 

The use of a structured scoring framework also facilitates dimension -level analysis, allowing 

us to examine how models perform across individual quality aspects such as coverage, 

hallucination, or structural accuracy. This provides deeper insight into mode l behavior beyond 

overall scores and helps identify strengths and weaknesses associated with specific architectures 

or training configurations. Overall, the combination of deterministic evaluation, multi -criteria 

scoring, and structured aggregation enables robust and reproducible comparison of automated test 

generation approaches. 

# 6.  Results and discussion 

Table 1 presents the evaluation results of the DeepSeek model before and after applying 

LoRA -based fine -tuning across different configurations of rank , scaling factor ( α), and dropout .22 

The baseline performance of the model before fine -tuning shows an overall score of 6 2.85 ,

indicating moderate capability in generating requirement -based test cases. The highest baseline 

scores are observed in structural and format accuracy (80.23), ambiguity (80.75), and redundancy 

(82.44), suggesting that the model is already capable of prod ucing relatively well -structured and 

readable outputs. However, the model performs less effectively in criteria that require deeper 

understanding of the requirement and preservation of detailed information, such as information 

coverage (50.28), critical content match (52.15), and diversity and novelty (43.67). These results 

highlight that, without task -specific adaptation, the model struggles to fully capture the semanti cs 

and detailed content necessary for comprehensive test case generation. 

Table 1. Performance scores obtained by the DeepSeek model before and after fine -tuning on the test case 

generation dataset across different LoRA configurations. The highest score obtained for each evaluation 

criterion is shown in underlined format.                                                                                                                                                         

> LoRA α 816 32 Before
> fine -
> tuning
> LoRA rank 16 32 16 32 16 32
> LoRA dropout 0.1 0.5 0.1 0.5 0.1 0.5 0.1 0.5 0.1 0.5 0.1 0.5
> Semantic similarity 62.94 63.71 64.10 65.32 57.49 58.30 60.94 62.57 55.13 55.71 56.49 57.16 60.19
> Information coverage 52.18 54.51 53.73 54.78 47.13 48.54 51.40 52.68 46.75 47.28 46.22 48.81 50.28
> Critical content match 53.70 53.95 54.39 55.06 48.54 51.47 52.71 54.36 49.38 49.93 48.07 50.35 52.15
> Structural and format accuracy 81.84 83.16 84.07 84.51 76.82 76.05 78.30 80.91 74.21 75.19 74.00 75.83 80.23
> Omission 49.65 51.28 52.68 52.90 47.08 47.68 48.59 50.17 42.97 44.10 43.53 46.55 47.31
> Hallucination 70.37 72.03 73.14 74.16 68.17 67.51 69.08 69.83 65.06 65.85 66.51 67.80 68.70
> Ambiguity 81.46 82.64 82.18 81.93 77.31 78.92 80.52 82.05 75.12 76.33 75.69 78.34 80.75
> Redundancy 84.20 83.82 84.55 83.49 81.19 81.70 83.23 83.94 79.03 79.62 80.46 80.04 82.44
> Diversity and novelty 44.51 47.19 48.53 49.35 42.70 44.16 45.64 46.72 40.76 41.47 41.18 43.26 43.67
> Overall 64.53 65.81 66.37 66. 82 60.71 61.59 63.37 64.80 58.71 59.49 59.12 60.90 62.85

After applying LoRA -based fine -tuning, consistent performance improvements can be 

observed across most evaluation metrics and configurations. The b est results are achieved when 

α=8 and rank =32 with dropout =0.5, producing the highest overall score of 66. 82 , which 

represents a substantial improvement over the baseline. In this configuration, improvements are 

particularly evident in semantic similarity (65.32), information coverage (54.78), and critical 

content match (55.06), indicating that the fine -tuned mo del becomes better at understanding 

requirements and preserving essential test -related information. Additionally, structural qualities 

such as format accuracy, hallucination control, and ambiguity remain con sistently strong, 

demonstrating that fine -tuning enhances semantic alignment without degrading structural quality. 

Across all configurations, higher LoRA ranks generally yield better performance, suggesting that 

increased adaptation capacity improves the m odel’s ability to learn task -specific patterns. 

However, performance declines slightly for higher α values (16 and 32), indicating that 23 

excessively large scaling factors may lead to less stable adaptation. Overall, these results confirm 

that LoRA -based fine -tuning significantly improves the DeepSeek model’s ability to generate 

accurate and comprehensive test cases while maintaining structu ral quality. 

Table 2 shows that the Llama -3.1 -8B -Instruct model achieves stronger performance than 

DeepSeek both before and after fine -tuning. Before fine -tuning, Llama obtains an overall score 

of 6 3.77 , which is higher than the DeepSeek baseline of 6 2.85 . Similar to DeepSeek, Llama is 

strongest in structural and format accuracy (81.20), ambiguity (82.17), and redundancy (85.22), 

indicating that even the untuned model can produce outputs that are relatively well organized, 

readable, and non -repetitive. At the same time, lower scores in information coverage (47.88), 

omission (48.54), and diversity and novelty (45.75) show that the model still misses important 

requirement details and tends to produce limited variations in test design without task -specific 

adaptation. Compa red with DeepSeek, however, Llama starts from a stronger baseline in several 

important criteria, including semantic similarity, critical content match, and overall score, 

suggesting a better natural fit for requirement -to -test -case generation even prior to fine -tuning. 

Table 2. Performance scores obtained by the Llama model before and after fine -tuning on the test case 

generation dataset across different LoRA configurations. The highest score obtained for each evaluation 

criterion is shown in underlined format.                                                                                                                                                         

> LoRA α 816 32 Before
> fine -
> tuning
> LoRA rank 16 32 16 32 16 32
> LoRA dropout 0.1 0.5 0.1 0.5 0.1 0.5 0.1 0.5 0.1 0.5 0.1 0.5
> Semantic similarity 65.11 67.80 66.38 67.25 61.07 62.49 64.70 65.62 58.06 58.84 60.15 62.72 61.53
> Information coverage 50.75 52.44 51.07 53.37 47.14 47.80 50.28 51.03 45.17 45.61 46.54 47.39 47.88
> Critical content match 57.02 58.19 57.55 57.32 54.31 55.74 56.47 57.30 51.80 51.27 53.25 55.28 53.62
> Structural and format accuracy 84.18 84.60 85.10 84.87 80.96 81.45 85.72 83.91 77.32 78.13 80.47 82.93 81.20
> Omission 51.36 52.75 52.41 51.74 48.53 50.06 51.09 51.70 45.91 46.30 47.61 49.54 48.54
> Hallucination 71.88 74.08 72.20 73.13 68.75 70.38 72.15 72.53 67.44 67.02 69.26 69.90 68.06
> Ambiguity 84.25 85.19 83.79 84.49 83.80 84.51 83.63 84.96 78.63 79.08 81.30 84.05 82.17
> Redundancy 85.64 86.04 85.03 85.60 84.23 85.05 84.95 86.44 80.12 81.19 83.00 85.73 85.22
> Diversity and novelty 48.78 50.33 48.20 49.51 45.79 47.19 48.31 49.19 41.05 41.77 43.87 47.41 45.75
> Overall 66.55 67.93 66.85 67.47 63.84 64.96 66.36 66.96 60.61 61.02 62.82 64.99 63.77

After LoRA -based fine -tuning, Llama shows clear and consistent improvements across 

nearly all evaluation criteria. The best overall result is ob tained with LoRA α=8, rank =16, and 

dropout =0.5, reaching an overall score of 67.93, which exceeds the best DeepSeek result of 66. 82 .

Under this best configuration, Llama achieves particularly strong scores in semantic similarity 

(67.80), hallucination (74.08), ambiguity (85.19), and redundancy (86.04), indicating that the 

fine -tuned model not only aligns more closely with the referenc e test cases but also produces 

clearer and more reliable outputs. As with DeepSeek, the results suggest that lower α values tend 24 

to work better, while increasing α to 16 or 32 generally leads to some degradation in performance. 

Unlike DeepSeek, however, Llama maintains comparatively strong results across a broader range 

of configurations, which may indicate greater robustness to LoRA hyperparameter changes. 

Overall, the results demonstrate that Llama benefits substantially from LoRA -based fine -tuning 

and outperforms DeepSeek in both baseline and fine -tuned settings, making it a stronger open -

source candidate for automated test case g eneration. 

Table 3 shows that the Ministral -8B -Instruct model achieves the strongest results among the 

open -source models, both before and after fine -tuning. Before fine -tuning, it reaches an overall 

score of 65.88, clearly outperforming the corresponding baselines o f DeepSeek (6 2.85 ) and Llama 

(6 3.77 ). This advantage is visible across nearly all evaluation criteria, especially structural and 

format accuracy (84.70), hallucination (71.26), ambiguity (84.09), and redundancy (89.72), 

indicating that the model already pr oduces highly structured, clear, and reliable test cases even 

without task -specific adaptation. In addition, its baseline scores in semantic similarity (64.31), 

information coverage (49.75), and critical content match (55.13) are competitive and generally 

stronger than those of DeepSeek and comparable to or better than those of Llama. These results 

suggest that Mistral has a stronger initial capability for transforming requirements into coherent 

and practically useful test cases. 

Table 3. Performance scores obtained by the Mistral model before and after fine -tuning on the test case 

generation dataset across different LoRA configurations. The highest score obtained for each evaluation 

criterion is shown in underlined format.                                                                                                                                                         

> LoRA α 816 32 Before
> fine -
> tuning
> LoRA rank 16 32 16 32 16 32
> LoRA dropout 0.1 0.5 0.1 0.5 0.1 0.5 0.1 0.5 0.1 0.5 0.1 0.5
> Semantic similarity 68.06 69.17 66.43 66.15 66.94 67.61 68.21 68.21 59.07 61.45 64.82 66.27 64.31
> Information coverage 53.82 55.30 51.30 51.73 51.02 51.17 52.87 53.19 43.62 46.73 48.33 50.66 49.75
> Critical content match 60.17 61.08 57.53 57.08 58.11 58.70 60.04 60.73 51.30 52.81 54.67 56.74 55.13
> Structural and format accuracy 88.78 90.27 85.96 86.53 86.21 86.53 87.69 88.15 79.44 82.39 84.05 86.12 84.70
> Omission 53.30 54.42 51.67 50.62 51.87 52.40 53.17 53.08 44.19 46.15 47.91 50.03 48.83
> Hallucination 76.22 77.08 73.80 73.29 74.75 75.02 75.43 75.90 65.72 69.56 70.18 72.48 71.26
> Ambiguity 87.61 89.02 85.81 86.25 86.83 86.65 87.01 87.22 78.35 81.10 85.52 86.01 84.09
> Redundancy 93.25 94.09 91.46 91.46 91.95 92.21 92.42 92.75 81.90 85.11 87.83 91.07 89.72
> Diversity and novelty 50.34 51.63 46.75 47.07 48.38 48.79 50.14 51.04 42.18 42.65 43.57 46.25 45.13
> Overall 70.17 71.34 67.85 67.79 68.45 68.78 69.66 70.03 60.64 63.10 65.20 67.29 65.88

After LoRA -based fine -tuning, the Mistral model improves further and delivers the best 

open -source performance observed in this study. The highest overall score, 71.34, is obtained 

with LoRA α=8, rank =16, and dropout =0.5, which is notably higher than the best fine -tuned 

results of Llama (67.93) and DeepSeek (66. 82 ). Under this configuration, the model achieves very 25 

strong scores in semantic similarity (69.17), information coverage (55.30), critical content match 

(61.08), structural and format accuracy (90.27), hallucination (77.08), ambiguity (89.02), and 

redundancy (94.09). These results indicate that fine -tuning su bstantially strengthens both the 

semantic alignment and the structural quality of the generated test cases. Similar to the previous 

models, the best results are generally achieved with lower α values, while larger α values, 

especially α=32, tend to reduce performance relative to the best settings. However, even under 

less favorable configurations, Mistral still remains highly competitive, showing greater robustness 

than DeepSeek and consistently outperforming Llama across most criteria. O verall, the results 

confirm that Mistral is the most effective open -source model for this task, and that LoRA -based 

fine -tuning can raise its performance to a level substantially above the other open -source 

alternatives. 

Table 4 presents the performance of the GPT -4.1 family models before and after fine -tuning, 

including the flagship GPT -4.1, the mid -sized GPT -4.1 -mini, and the lightweight GPT -4.1 -nano. 

Before fine -tuning, all three models already demonstrate strong perfor mance, with overall scores 

of 74.15, 74.10, and 72.76, respectively. These results significantly exceed those of all open -

source models, highlighting the strong baseline capabilities of proprietary models in requirement -

based test case generation. In parti cular, the models achieve very high scores in structural and 

format accuracy (above 91), ambiguity (above 90), and redundancy (above 93), indicating that 

they consistently produce well -structured, clear, and concise test cases. Among the three variants, 

GP T-4.1 and GPT -4.1 -mini perform almost identically, with GPT -4.1 -mini slightly 

outperforming GPT -4.1 in several criteria such as semantic similarity and information coverage, 

suggesting that the smaller model retains strong reasoning and generation capabili ties despite 

reduced size. 

After fine -tuning, further improvements are observed for GPT -4.1 and GPT -4.1 -mini, with 

overall scores increasing to 78.32 and 79.74, respectively. These gains are particularly evident in 

information coverage, critical content match, and diversity and nove lty, indicating that fine -tuning 

enhances the models’ ability to capture detailed requirement information and generate more 

comprehensive and varied test cases. GPT -4.1 -mini achieves the best overall performance among 

all evaluated models, demonstrating th at a balanced model size can provide an optimal trade -off 

between capability and adaptability. In contrast, GPT -4.1 -nano shows a notable decline after fine -

tuning, with its overall score dropping to 64.71, primarily due to significant decreases in structur al 

accuracy, ambiguity, and redundancy. This suggests that smaller models may be more sensitive 

to fine -tuning and can suffer from instability or reduced generalization when adapted to complex 

structured generation tasks. Overall, these results confirm tha t fine -tuning further enhances the 26 

already strong performance of larger GPT -4.1 models, while also highlighting important 

differences in robustness and adaptability across model sizes within the same family. 

Table 4. Performance scores obtained by the GPT -4.1 models before and after fine -tuning on the test case 

generation dataset. The highest score obtained for each evaluation criterion is shown in underlined format.                                                                   

> Before fine -tuning After fine -tuning
> GPT -4.1 GPT -4.1 -mini GPT -4.1 -nano GPT -4.1 GPT -4.1 -mini GPT -4.1 -nano
> Semantic similarity 70.62 70.83 70.48 72.77 73.81 66.94
> Information coverage 58.61 59.65 56.45 66.73 68.95 53.81
> Critical content match 65.83 66.25 63.12 70.06 72.36 58.47
> Structural and format accuracy 93.40 92.36 91.94 97.73 97.29 83.61
> Omission 58.19 58.88 55.97 65.62 68.61 52.84
> Hallucination 80.27 80.55 79.51 83.05 84.16 64.93
> Ambiguity 92.15 91.38 90.69 95.0 95.0 80.48
> Redundancy 95.97 94.44 93.61 94.23 93.61 72.56
> Diversity and novelty 52.36 52.56 53.05 60.69 63.88 48.75
> Overall 74.15 74.10 72.76 78.32 79.74 64.71

When comparing all evaluated models, a clear performance hierarchy emerges between the 

open -source and proprietary approaches. Among the open -source models, Ministral -8B -Instruct 

consistently achieves the best results, outperforming both Llama -3.1 -8B and D eepSeek across 

most evaluation metrics and configurations. Its strong baseline performance, combined with 

substantial gains after LoRA -based fine -tuning, demonstrates its superior capability in capturing 

requirement semantics, preserving critical content, and producing well -structured test cases. In 

contrast, while Llama shows solid and robust improvements after fine -tuning, and DeepSeek 

benefits significantly from adaptation despite its smaller size, both models remain below Mistral 

in overall performance. However, all open -source models exhibit a common trend: fine -tuning 

leads to meaningful improvements, particularly in semantic similarity, information coverage, and 

critical content match, confirming the effectiveness of parameter -efficient adaptation for this task. 

Despite these improvements, the GPT -4.1 family models still achieve the highest overall 

performance, especially after fine -tuning, with GPT -4.1 -mini delivering the best results across all 

evaluated models. These models demonstrate superior capabilities in both semantic understanding 

and structured generation, as reflected in consistently high scores across all evaluation criteria. 

However, the performance gap between proprietary and open -source models narrows 

significantly when considering the best fine -tun ed open -source model. Notably, the fine -tuned 

Mistral model achieves performance comparable to the pre -fine -tuned GPT -4.1 models, which is 

a highly valuable result given its significantly smaller size and lower operational cost. This 

highlights a key pract ical advantage of open -source models: they offer greater flexibility, cost 27 

efficiency, and deployability, allowing organizations to run models locally, customize them 

extensively, and avoid dependency on external APIs. In contrast, proprietary models provide 

higher out -of -the -box performance and ease of use but come with trade -of fs in terms of cost, 

limited control over fine -tuning processes, and potential constraints related to data privacy and 

deployment. Therefore, the choice between open -source and proprietary models depends on 

application requirements, with open -source models being particularly attractive for scenarios 

where cost, customization, and data control are critical, while proprietary models remain 

preferable for maximum performance and minimal setup effort. 

# 7.  Conclusion 

This paper addressed the challenge of automated test case generation from natural language 

requirements, a task that remains highly complex due to the ambiguity of requirements and the 

structured nature of test artifacts. Motivated by the limitations of ru le -based and traditional 

machine learning approaches, and the growing potential of LLMs , we investigated how LLMs 

can be effectively adapted for this task. In particular, we focused on parameter -efficient fine -

tuning using LoRA, aiming to balance performan ce with computational efficiency. To support a 

comprehensive and scalable evaluation, we also introduced an automated evaluation framework 

based on GPT -4o, enabling consistent assessment across mul tiple models and configurations .

From a methodological perspective, we conducted a large -scale empirical study involving 

multiple open -source and proprietary models, including DeepSeek, Llama, Mistral, and GPT -4.1 

variants. We systematically explored different LoRA configurations, varying rank, scaling factor, 

and dropout, and evaluated their impact using a multi -criteria evaluation framework. The results 

demonstrate that LoRA -based fine -tuning significantly improves model performance across all 

open -source models, particularly in semantic understanding, information coverage, and critical 

content preservation. Among the open -source models, Ministral -8B -Instruct achieved the best 

performance, showing strong robustness and substantial gains after fine -tuning. Furthermore, the 

experiments conf irm that LoRA hyperparameters have a meaningful effect on downstream 

performance, highlighting the importance of careful configuration in parameter -efficient fine -

tuning. 

In comparison, the GPT -4.1 family models achieved the highest overall performance, 

especially after fine -tuning, demonstrating superior capabilities in both reasoning and structured 

generation. However, one of the most important findings of this study is t hat a fine -tuned 8B 

open -source model can reach performance comparable to pre -fine -tuned GPT -4 models, which 28 

has significant practical implications. This result suggests that organizations can achieve 

competitive performance using smaller, more cost -efficient, and locally deployable models when 

combined with effective fine -tuning strategies. Overall, this work ad vances the understanding of 

LLM -based test automation and provides actionable insights for both researchers and 

practitioners, particularly in selecting models, configuring fine -tuning approaches, and designing 

scalable evaluation methods for real -world so ftware testing applications. 

Declaration of generative AI and AI -assisted technologies in the manuscript preparation 

process 

During the prep aration of this work the authors used GPT -5.3 in order to improve language 

and readability. After using this tool , the authors reviewed and edited t he content as needed and 

take full responsibility for the content of the published article. 

References 

[1] M. A. Jamil, M. Arif, N. S. A. Abubakar, and A. Ahmad, "Software Testing Techniques: A 

Literature Review," in 2016 6th International Conference on Information and 

Communication Technology for The Muslim World (ICT4M) , 2016, pp. 177 -182. 

[2] S. Anand, E. K. Burke, T. Y. Chen, J. Clark, M. B. Cohen, W. Grieskamp , et al. , "An 

orchestrated survey of methodologies for automated software test case generation," 

Journal of Systems and Software, vol. 86, pp. 1978 -2001, 2013. 

[3] S. Alagarsamy, C. Tantithamthavorn, and A. Aleti, "A3Test: Assertion -Augmented 

Automated Test case generation," Information and Software Technology, vol. 176, p. 

10756 5, 2024. 

[4] A. Celik and Q. H. Mahmoud, "A Review of Large Language Models for Automated Test 

Case Generation," Machine Learning and Knowledge Extraction, vol. 7, p. 97, 2025. 

[5] A. Mustafa, W. M. Wan -Kadir, N. Ibrahim, M. A. Shah, M. Younas, A. Khan , et al. ,

"Automated test case generation from requirements: A systematic literature review," 

Computers, Materials and Continua, vol. 67, pp. 1819 -1833, 2021. 

[6] T. Potuzak and R. Lipka, "Current Trends in Automated Test Case Generation," in 2023 

18th Conference on Computer Science and Intelligence Systems (FedCSIS) , 2023, pp. 627 -

636. 

[7] G. Spanoudakis, A. Zisman, E. Pérez -Miñana, and P. Krause, "Rule -based generation of 

requirements traceability relations," Journal of Systems and Software, vol. 72, pp. 105 -

127, 2004. 

[8] C. Wang, F. Pastore, A. Goknil, and L. C. Briand, "Automatic Generation of Acceptance 

Test Cases From Use Case Specifications: An NLP -Based Approach," IEEE Transactions on 

Software Engineering, vol. 48, pp. 585 -616, 2022. 

[9] C. Y. Chen and J. L. Huang, "Reinforcement -Learning -Based Test Program Generation for 

Software -Based Self -Test," in 2019 IEEE 28th Asian Test Symposium (ATS) , 2019, pp. 73 -

735. 29 

[10] A. Singh, "Taxonomy of Machine Learning Techniques in Test Case Generation," in 2023 

7th International Conference on Intelligent Computing and Control Systems (ICICCS) ,

2023, pp. 474 -481. 

[11] A. Fan, B. Gokkaya, M. Harman, M. Lyubarskiy, S. Sengupta, S. Yoo , et al. , "Large 

Language Models for Software Engineering: Survey and Open Problems," in 2023 

IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering: Future of Software 

Engineering (ICSE -FoSE) , 2023, pp. 31 -53. 

[12] X. Hou, Y. Zhao, Y. Liu, Z. Yang, K. Wang, L. Li , et al. , "Large Language Models for Software 

Engineering: A Systematic Literature Review," ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., vol. 

33, p. Article 220, 2024. 

[13] W. Wang, C. Yang, Z. Wang, Y. Huang, Z. Chu, D. Song , et al. , "TestEval: Benchmarking 

Large Language Models for Test Case Generation," Albuquerque, New Mexico, 2025, pp. 

3547 -3562. 

[14] M. Schäfer, S. Nadi, A. Eghbali, and F. Tip, "An Empirical Evaluation of Using Large 

Language Models for Automated Unit Test Generation," IEEE Transactions on Software 

Engineering, vol. 50, pp. 85 -105, 2024. 

[15] A. M. Dakhel, A. Nikanjam, V. Majdinasab, F. Khomh, and M. C. Desmarais, "Effective 

test generation using pre -trained Large Language Models and mutation testing," 

Information and Software Technology, vol. 171, p. 107468, 2024. 

[16] M. Lafi, T. Alrawashed, and A. M. Hammad, "Automated Test Cases Generation From 

Requirements Specification," in 2021 International Conference on Information 

Technology (ICIT) , 2021, pp. 852 -857. 

[17] J. Navarro and R. Ibarra, "Automatic test case generation using natural language 

processing: A systematic mapping study," Information and Software Technology, vol. 

189, p. 107929, 2026. 

[18] F. Arooj, H. Alishba, and R. Summair, "Automated Test Case Generation From Natural 

Language Requirements Using Natural Language Processing," Journal of Computing & 

Biomedical Informatics, vol. 9, 09/01 2025. 

[19] H. Ayenew and M. Wagaw, "Software test case generation using natural language 

processing (NLP): a systematic literature review," Artificial Intelligence Evolution, pp. 1 -

10, 2024. 

[20] Y. Xia, J. Kim, Y. Chen, H. Ye, S. Kundu, C. C. Hao , et al. , "Understanding the Performance 

and Estimating the Cost of LLM Fine -Tuning," in 2024 IEEE International Symposium on 

Workload Characterization (IISWC) , 2024, pp. 210 -223. 

[21] N. Ding, Y. Qin, G. Yang, F. Wei, Z. Yang, Y. Su , et al. , "Parameter -efficient fine -tuning of 

large -scale pre -trained language models," Nature Machine Intelligence, vol. 5, pp. 220 -

235, 2023. 

[22] Z. Yang, R. Huang, C. Cui, N. Niu, and D. Towey, "Requirements -based test generation: A 

comprehensive survey," ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, 

2025. 

[23] S. Alagarsamy, C. Tantithamthavorn, W. Takerngsaksiri, C. Arora, and A. Aleti, 

"Enhancing large language models for text -to -testcase generation," Journal of Systems 

and Software, vol. 230, p. 112531, 2025. 

[24] L. H. Tahat, B. Vaysburg, B. Korel, and A. J. Bader, "Requirement -based automated black -

box test generation," in 25th Annual International Computer Software and Applications 

Conference. COMPSAC 2001 , 2001, pp. 489 -495. 

[25] S. Hesari, R. Behjati, and T. Yue, "Towards a systematic requirement -based test 

generation framework: Industrial challenges and needs," in 2013 21st IEEE International 

Requirements Engineering Conference (RE) , 2013, pp. 261 -266. 30 

[26] R. P. Verma and M. R. Beg, "Generation of Test Cases from Software Requirements Using 

Natural Language Processing," in 2013 6th International Conference on Emerging Trends 

in Engineering and Technology , 2013, pp. 140 -147. 

[27] C. Ioannides and K. I. Eder, "Coverage -Directed Test Generation Automated by Machine 

Learning -- A Review," ACM Trans. Des. Autom. Electron. Syst., vol. 17, p. Article 7, 2012. 

[28] K. Kikuma, T. Yamada, K. Sato, and K. Ueda, "Preparation method in automated test case 

generation using machine learning," in Proceedings of the 10th International Symposium 

on Information and Communication Technology , 2019, pp. 393 -398. 

[29] N. Venkata Siva Prakash, "Machine Learning Techniques for Automated Test Case 

Generation and Optimization in Software Quality Assurance," Artificial Intelligence, 

Machine Learning, and Autonomous Systems, vol. 4, pp. 289 -327, 2020. 

[30] J. Wang, Y. Huang, C. Chen, Z. Liu, S. Wang, and Q. Wang, "Software Testing With Large 

Language Models: Survey, Landscape, and Vision," IEEE Transactions on Software 

Engineering, vol. 50, pp. 911 -936, 2024. 

[31] Z. Zheng, K. Ning, Q. Zhong, J. Chen, W. Chen, L. Guo , et al. , "Towards an understanding 

of large language models in software engineering tasks," Empirical Software 

Engineering, vol. 30, p. 50, 2024. 

[32] Y. Li, P. Liu, H. Wang, J. Chu, and W. E. Wong, "Evaluating large language models for 

software testing," Computer Standards & Interfaces, vol. 93, p. 103942, 2025. 

[33] J. Jiang, F. Wang, J. Shen, S. Kim, and S. Kim, "A Survey on Large Language Models for 

Code Generation," ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., vol. 35, p. Article 58, 2026. 

[34] X. Du, M. Liu, K. Wang, H. Wang, J. Liu, Y. Chen , et al. , "Evaluating Large Language Models 

in Class -Level Code Generation," presented at the Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 46th 

International Conference on Software Engineering, Lisbon, Portugal, 2024. 

[35] X. Hu, F. Niu, J. Chen, X. Zhou, J. Zhang, J. He , et al. , "Assessing and Advancing 

Benchmarks for Evaluating Large Language Models in Software Engineering Tasks," ACM 

Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., 2026. 

[36] J. J. Norheim, E. Rebentisch, D. Xiao, L. Draeger, A. Kerbrat, and O. L. de Weck, 

"Challenges in applying large language models to requirements engineering tasks," 

Design Science, vol. 10, p. e16, 2024. 

[37] M. A. Zadenoori, J. Dąbrowski, W. Alhoshan, L. Zhao, and A. Ferrari, "Large language 

models (llms) for requirements engineering (re): A systematic literature review," arXiv 

preprint arXiv:2509.11446, 2025. 

[38] D. M. Anisuzzaman, J. G. Malins, P. A. Friedman, and Z. I. Attia, "Fine -Tuning Large 

Language Models for Specialized Use Cases," Mayo Clinic Proceedings: Digital Health, 

vol. 3, p. 100184, 2025. 

[39] H. Yang, Y. Zhang, J. Xu, H. Lu, P. -A. Heng, and W. Lam, "Unveiling the Generalization 

Power of Fine -Tuned Large Language Models," Mexico City, Mexico, 2024, pp. 884 -899. 

[40] K. Tirumala, A. Markosyan, L. Zettlemoyer, and A. Aghajanyan, "Memorization without 

overfitting: Analyzing the training dynamics of large language models," Advances in 

Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 35, pp. 38274 -38290, 2022. 

[41] M. Moradi, K. Yan, D. Colwell, M. Samwald, and R. Asgari, "A Critical Review of Methods 

and Challenges in Large Language Models," Computers, Materials and Continua, vol. 82, 

pp . 1681 -1698, 2025. 

[42] E. J. Hu, Y. Shen, P. Wallis, Z. Allen -Zhu, Y. Li, S. Wang , et al. , "Lora: Low -rank adaptation 

of large language models," Iclr, vol. 1, p. 3, 2022. 

[43] M. Yang, J. Chen, J. Tao, Y. Zhang, J. Liu, J. Zhang , et al. , "Low -rank adaptation for 

foundation models: A comprehensive review," arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.00365, 2024. 

[44] A. Liu, B. Feng, B. Xue, B. Wang, B. Wu, C. Lu , et al. , "Deepseek -v3 technical report," 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.19437, 2024. 31 

[45] H. Touvron, T. Lavril, G. Izacard, X. Martinet, M. -A. Lachaux, T. Lacroix , et al. , "Llama: 

Open and efficient foundation language models," arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 

2023. 

[46] T. Kaufmann, P. Weng, V. Bengs, and E. Hüllermeier, "A survey of reinforcement learning 

from human feedback," Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2024. 

[47] M. AI. (01/10/2025). Mistral documentation . Available: https://docs.mistral.ai/ 

[48] J. Ainslie, J. Lee -Thorp, M. de Jong, Y. Zemlyanskiy, F. Lebron, and S. Sanghai, "GQA: 

Training Generalized Multi -Query Transformer Models from Multi -Head Checkpoints," 

Singapore, 2023, pp. 4895 -4901. 

[49] C. -H. Chiang and H. -y. Lee, "A Closer Look into Using Large Language Models for 

Automatic Evaluation," Singapore, 2023, pp. 8928 -8942. 

[50] E. Emirtekin, "Large Language Model -Powered Automated Assessment: A Systematic 

Review," Applied Sciences, vol. 15, p. 5683, 2025. 

[51] W. Xie, J. Niu, C. J. Xue, and N. Guan, "Grade Like a Human: Rethinking Automated 

Assessment with Large Language Models," presented at the Proceedings of the 

International Conference on Research in Adaptive and Convergent Systems, 2026. 

[52] T. Vu, K. Krishna, S. Alzubi, C. Tar, M. Faruqui, and Y. -H. Sung, "Foundational Autoraters: 

Taming Large Language Models for Better Automatic Evaluation," Miami, Florida, USA, 

2024, pp. 17086 -17105. 32 

Appendix A 

The prompt used for generating test cases from test requirements. This prompt was employed 

during fine -tuning the LLMs, also during inference when we evaluated the LLMs. 

### Instruction: 

You are a test automation assistant. Your task is to generate a test 

case from a given software requirement. Each requirement includes a name 

and a detailed description. Based on this input and given the domain 

knowledge, you must generate the following: 

###Test Case Name: 

- Provide a concise, descriptive name for the test case. 

- It should summarize the module or feature being tested and the 

behavior or condition under test. 

- It should be unique, specific, and traceable to the requirement. 

###Test Case Type: 

Indicate the type of test, selected from the following: 

- Functional - UI (tests user interface behavior) 

- Functional - API (tests backend API behavior) 

- Usability (tests user experience or workflow) 

- Regression (ensures existing functionality is not broken) 

###Test Case Description: 

- Describe the purpose of the test case. 

- Include what the test validates and any relevant context. 

- Mention key functionality, preconditions, or variations. 

###Test Steps: 

- Write a step -by -step procedure to perform the test. 

- Each step should be clear, specific, and ordered. 

- Use the structure: 

1. [Setup or action] 

2. [System response or validation] 

- If API testing is involved, include: 33 

- HTTP method and endpoint 

- Payload and headers (if applicable) 

- Expected response and status code 

- Any conditions, edge cases, or validation rules 

Assume that the system includes both a web -based UI and RESTful APIs. 

Requirements may involve templates, configuration fields, user 

permissions, workflows, or API interactions. Acceptance criteria define 

both standard (happy path) and boundary (error or edge) cases. The 

generated test case should cover the main path and validate expected 

system behavior precisely. 

Do not copy the requirement verbatim. Instead, interpret it to create 

an accurate, testable, and technically detailed test case. 

Here is the input: 

---

Requirement Name: 

{requirement_name} 

Requirement Description: 

{requirement_description} 

---

###Domain knowledge 

{domain_knowledge} 

### Response: 

- Test case name: {test_case_name} 

- Test case type: {test_case_type} 

- Test case description: {test_case_description} 

- Test steps: {test_steps} 34 

Appendix B

The prompt used for automated evaluation of response generated by the LLMs for the test 

case generation task. 

You are acting as an *expert automated evaluator* for test case 

generation in a software testing task. 

== CONTEXT == 

You are given: 

- A software test requirement, which includes a name and description. 

- A model -generated test case, which includes a test case name, type, 

description, and test steps. 

- The ground truth (reference) test case created by a human. 

== TASK == 

You must evaluate the quality of the model -generated test case based 

on the following nine advanced criteria. For each, assign a score between 

0 and 100, where: 

- 90–100 = Excellent 

- 70–89 = Good 

- 50–69 = Fair 

- 30–49 = Poor 

- 1–29 = Very poor 

- 0 = Completely missing, unrelated, or misleading 

Scores can be any integer value in the range [0, 100], allowing 

fine -grained evaluation. 

== EVALUATION CRITERIA == 

1. Semantic Similarity: How closely the meaning of the model -

generated test case matches the ground truth. Focus on *overall intent* 

and key concepts, not literal wording. 

2. Information Coverage: How completely the generated output 

includes all the key details, preconditions, actions, expected outcomes, 

and edge cases present in the ground truth. 35 

3. Critical Content Match: Whether the model has preserved *must -

have* elements (e.g., specific actions, roles, UI elements, data types) 

from the requirement or ground truth. 

4. Structural and Format Accuracy: Whether the output is well -

structured and conforms to expected formatting: 

- Clear test case title and type 

- Actionable, step -by -step instructions 

- Coherent order of steps 

- Consistent formatting 

5. Omission: Degree to which important information is *missing*. 

Higher scores mean minimal omissions. 

6. Hallucination: Degree to which the model *invents irrelevant or 

unsupported content* not present in the requirement. Higher scores mean 

fewer or no hallucinations. 

7. Ambiguity: Clarity and precision of language used. Higher scores 

mean the test case is easy to understand and unambiguous. 

8. Redundancy: Whether the test case contains unnecessary 

repetition. Higher scores mean the output is concise and avoids redundant 

content. 

9. Diversity and Novelty: If applicable, does the generated test 

case introduce valid, logically sound variations or interpretations of 

the requirement that differ meaningfully from the ground truth? 

== INPUT == 

### Requirement 

- Name: {req uirement _name} 

- Description: {req uirement _descr iption }

### Model -Generated Test Case 

{model_response} 36 

### Ground Truth Test Case 

- Name: {test _case _name} 

- Type: {test _case _type} 

- Description: {test _case _descr iption }

- Steps: {test_steps} 

== OUTPUT FORMAT == 

Return a JSON -style dictionary with each metric as a key and a score 

(0 –100) as the value. 

Example format: 

{{ 

"semantic_similarity": 92, 

"information_coverage": 78, 

"critical_content_match": 85, 

"structural_format_accuracy": 88, 

"omission": 90, 

"hallucination": 95, 

"ambiguity": 93, 

"redundancy": 87, 

"diversity_novelty": 72 

}} 

Do not include any explanation, comments, or extra formatting. Only 

return the dictionary. 

"""