Title: Causal Episodic Memory for Feedback-Driven Agent Repair

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05906v1

Published Time: Fri, 07 Aug 2026 00:51:54 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
## Causal Episodic Memory for Feedback-Driven Agent Repair 

Khang Nhat Hoang Vo 1, Tam Minh Chu 2, Anh Trac Duc Dinh 2

Thuyen Vinh Ha Bui 2, Tho Quan 21Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates 

> 2

Faculty of Computer Science and Engineering, Ho Chi Minh City University of Technology (HCMUT), VNU-HCM, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam  

> Correspondence: Khang.Vo@mbzuai.ac.ae, qttho@hcmut.edu.vn

Abstract 

LLM agents that repair failures often discard successful corrections, forcing later episodes to rediscover similar solutions. We study whether finalized repair outcomes can improve subse-quent Text-to-SQL episodes without parame-ter updates. We introduce MERIT, a training-free agent that maintains an online dual-polarity memory of oracle-verified corrections and ob-served unsuccessful directions. Under oracle-assisted benchmark feedback, only memories from earlier finalized episodes are eligible for retrieval. A deterministic classifier assigns a coarse failure type, which conditions a hybrid lexical-dense retriever before the frozen model generates each revision. Using Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct with identical initial predictions and repair budgets, MERIT improves execution accuracy over stateless iterative repair from 

66 .34% to 69 .79% on Spider and from 47 .35% 

to 48 .44% on BIRD. Paired analyses provide clear evidence for the Spider gain but weaker evidence on BIRD. MERIT is not reliably sep-arated from untyped dynamic retrieval on ei-ther benchmark, while Reflexion-style mem-ory reaches 51 .24% on BIRD at substantially higher inference cost. Ablations show that neg-ative memory contributes modestly, the value of type conditioning and lexical–dense rank-ing is dataset dependent, and schema-local ex-perience provides the most consistent benefit. These results clarify when causal cross-query memory improves repair and when broader memory representations remain preferable. 

1 Introduction 

Dependable language agents must do more than produce a correct action once: they must respond to environmental feedback and retain what they learn from it. ReAct established the interleav-ing of reasoning, acting, and environment ob-servations, while Self-Refine, CRITIC, and Self-Debugging showed that iterative feedback, exter-nal tools, and execution signals can improve an agent’s current output (Yao et al., 2023; Madaan et al., 2023; Gou et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024). Such grounding is important because intrinsic self-correction without external evidence is often un-reliable and can even degrade reasoning perfor-mance (Huang et al., 2024). In Text-to-SQL, de-composition and execution-guided refinement have likewise improved generation by diagnosing or re-vising a query within its current episode (Pourreza and Rafiei, 2023; Dai et al., 2026). These meth-ods, however, largely treat each new query as a fresh problem. Once a useful correction has been discovered, it is typically unavailable when a simi-lar failure appears in a later query. This limits an agent’s ability to improve through continued inter-action, even when failures such as missing joins, invalid schema references, and incorrect aggrega-tions recur across tasks. Cross-episode memory offers a mechanism for learning from such experience without modifying model parameters. Reflexion retains verbal re-flections from earlier trials, and ExpeL extracts reusable natural language knowledge from collec-tions of agent trajectories (Shinn et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2024). In Text-to-SQL, retrieval-based meth-ods such as DAIL-SQL and ACT-SQL instead se-lect question-SQL demonstrations to improve ini-tial generation (Gao et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2023). These approaches demonstrate the value of recall-ing prior experience, but they do not organize re-pair memories jointly by the failure that produced them and the outcome of the attempted correction. Semantic similarity alone may therefore retrieve ir-relevant episodes or conflate unsuccessful attempts with verified corrections. We study whether struc-tured episodic memory can improve cross-query repair performance. We introduce MERIT (Memory-Augmented 

Error-Typed Retrieval for Iterative Text-to-SQL repair), a training-free agent that accumulates struc-tured repair experience online. MERIT stores 1arXiv:2608.05906v1 [cs.CL] 6 Aug 2026 oracle-verified corrections as positive guidance and observed unsuccessful directions as negative guid-ance. A deterministic classifier assigns a coarse failure type, which conditions a hybrid lexical– dense retriever before the frozen model generates each repair. Only memories from finalized earlier episodes are available to the current query, enabling improvement through cross-query experience with-out parameter updates. We study this process under oracle-assisted benchmark feedback. Here, causal 

denotes temporal memory availability, not the ab-sence of correctness supervision. We make three contributions: • We introduce MERIT and formulate Text-to-SQL correction as causal episodic memory for feedback-driven agent repair , in which only outcomes from finalized earlier episodes may guide the current query. • We propose error-guided hybrid retrieval that organizes repair experience by outcome and failure type, then ranks precedents using lexi-cal and dense signals. • We provide a controlled evaluation over three stream orders, comparing accuracy, repair be-havior, and inference cost across MERIT and alternative cross-query memory strategies. 

2 Related Work 

LLM-based Text-to-SQL. Recent Text-to-SQL systems improve semantic parsing through struc-tured reasoning, candidate generation, and in-context example selection. DIN-SQL decomposes complex questions into schema linking, classi-fication, and staged SQL generation (Pourreza and Rafiei, 2023); CHASE-SQL explores multi-ple reasoning paths and selects candidates using execution-guided signals (Pourreza et al., 2025); and SQL-PaLM studies instruction tuning and prompting at larger model scales (Sun et al., 2024). Retrieval-based prompting provides another source of improvement: DAIL-SQL selects demonstra-tions using question and SQL similarity, while ACT-SQL retrieves examples augmented with au-tomatically generated reasoning traces (Gao et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2023). These methods primar-ily target the quality of the initial prediction or select demonstrations from a pre-constructed pool. MERIT instead begins from a failed prediction and studies whether the correction discovered for one query can improve the repair of later queries. 

Execution-guided correction. Environment feedback provides an external signal for revising generated programs and structured outputs. Self-Debugging uses execution results to diagnose and revise code, Self-Refine iteratively improves outputs through model-generated feedback, and CRITIC grounds correction in tool-mediated critique (Chen et al., 2024; Madaan et al., 2023; Gou et al., 2024). Related work has applied execution-guided diagnosis and repair directly to SQL (Shen et al., 2026; Chau and Peters, 2025; Gong et al., 2025). More specialized Text-to-SQL agents introduce self-correction guidelines, multi-agent refinement, search over candidate rewrites, or difficulty-aware question rewriting (Askari et al., 2025; Deng et al., 2025; Lyu et al., 2025; Mao et al., 2024). These approaches strengthen the correction process within a query. MERIT addresses a complementary question: how that experience should be retained and reused after the current query ends. 

Experience retrieval and agent memory. Sev-eral agent architectures use memory to transfer information across episodes. Reflexion converts feedback into verbal reflections that guide later trials (Shinn et al., 2023), while ExpeL extracts reusable knowledge from collections of successful and failed trajectories (Zhao et al., 2024). Retrieval-augmented repair methods similarly expand an ex-perience pool and retrieve related examples for sub-sequent problems (Zhao et al., 2025). General-purpose memory systems address longer-running interaction and recall: MemGPT manages infor-mation across working and archival memory, Gen-erative Agents maintain experience streams and higher-level reflections, and MemoryBank stores long-term conversational experience (Packer et al., 2023; Park et al., 2023; Zhong et al., 2024). To-gether, these works establish that agents can benefit from experience beyond the immediate context, but they do not prescribe how execution-derived repair evidence should be represented. MERIT adapts cross-episode memory to online Text-to-SQL repair by storing transformations dis-covered after an initial prediction fails, rather than demonstrations intended for first-pass generation. Its memory distinguishes execution-verified cor-rections from selected unsuccessful directions and assigns each entry a coarse failure type. This label acts as a retrieval prior, while lexical and dense similarity rank candidate precedents within the re-2sulting pool. The formulation therefore supports a controlled study of how polarity, failure typing, ranking, and schema locality shape the value of cross-query repair experience. 

3 Methodology 

3.1 Causal Online Repair Formulation 

Figure 1 presents MERIT as an online correction– accumulation process. At stream position t, the agent receives a question qt, schema St, optional dataset evidence at, executable database Dt, and shared initial SQL prediction y(0)  

> t

. The prediction is generated once with greedy decoding and reused by every repair method, isolating the effect of the repair strategy. 

Observable feedback and benchmark cor-rectness. Our main experiments use the 

denotation_confirmed regime. After at-tempt k, the benchmark evaluator returns 

V (Dt, y (k) 

> t

) = (z(k) 

> t

, ϵ (k) 

> t

), where z(k) 

> t

is C OR -

> RECT

, D ENOTATION MISMATCH , E XECUTION 

ERROR , or TIMEOUT , and ϵ(k) 

> t

contains the latest observable Database Management System (DBMS) error when one exists. Spider uses the pinned test-suite execution protocol, whereas BIRD compares predicted and reference result rows under the pinned timeout protocol. The reference SQL and reference rows remain isolated inside the evaluator and are not supplied to generation, classification, or retrieval. The model receives only the attempt status, available DBMS error, and predicted failure type. Nevertheless, the oracle decision controls episode termination and memory polarity. The reported setting is therefore oracle-assisted benchmark repair rather than au-tonomous correction from DBMS feedback alone. Each initially incorrect query defines one episode. After k repair generations, its local history is H(k) 

> t

= ( y(0)  

> t

, . . . , y (k) 

> t

), while M<t contains entries produced by finalized episodes at earlier stream positions. Given a repair budget K = 7 , the objective is to find some y(k) 

> t

, k ≤ K, for which 

z(k) 

> t

= CORRECT .Current-query attempts remain in H(k) 

> t

and can-not enter cross-query retrieval. A memory en-try x is eligible only if sourcePos( x) < t and 

sourceQuery( x)̸ = qt, and global memory is up-dated only after episode termination. Thus, causal 

refers to temporal memory availability: the cur-rent query cannot access its unfinished trajectory or future-query experience. 

3.2 MERIT: Correction and Experience Accumulation 

MERIT combines a deterministic failure classi-fier, an online dual-polarity memory, and a type-conditioned hybrid retriever. For each unsuccessful candidate, MERIT classifies the current failure, re-trieves causally available experience, and prompts the frozen model to generate one revision. The episode continues until oracle-confirmed correct-ness or budget exhaustion. 

Initialization and failure diagnosis. If y(0)  

> t

is oracle-confirmed correct, the query is finalized without creating repair memory because no correc-tive transition was observed. Otherwise, MERIT initializes H(0)  

> t

= [ y(0)  

> t

] and enters the repair loop. At step k, the classifier maps the current un-successful query y(k−1)  

> t

to a failure type τ (k−1)  

> t

.Its output categories are R ESULT MISMATCH ,SCHEMA LINKING , A GGREGATION , F ILTER /-VALUE , E XECUTION , S YNTAX , and U NKNOWN .The classifier is deterministic and uses only exe-cution status and observable DBMS text. Ordered rules identify schema-reference errors, parse fail-ures, aggregate misuse, type mismatches, execution failures, and timeouts; the first matching rule de-termines the label. Other nonempty DBMS errors map to U NKNOWN , while executable but oracle-incorrect SQL maps to R ESULT MISMATCH . The classifier does not inspect the SQL AST or infer semantic errors such as incorrect joins or ordering. The label is recomputed after each unsuccessful revision and serves only as a retrieval prior. The complete rules appear in Appendix C. 

Online dual-polarity memory. Memory is par-titioned into positive and negative pools, M<t =

M+ 

> <t

∪ M −

> <t

. An entry is represented as x =

⟨c, τ, ∆, o, ρ ⟩, where c stores the source question, schema, unsuccessful SQL, status, and observable feedback; τ is the source failure type; ∆ describes the observed SQL transformation; o ∈ { +, −} is the polarity; and ρ records provenance. A positive entry records an oracle-confirmed failed-to-correct transition y− → y+. A negative entry records the final direction attempted in an unresolved episode, indicating only that it failed in its source context without asserting an unobserved cause or universal invalidity. 3Frozen LLM as    

> Semantic Parser
> Natural
> language
> question
> Initial
> SQL
> Execution
> error or
> denotation
> mismatch
> Deterministic Error Classifier
> Iterative Repair Loop
> Database
> schema
> Observable feedback
> Current error type Type-conditioned candidate pool
> Dense + lexical ranking
> Error-Typed Hybrid Retriever
> Repair Generation with Frozen LLM
> Current context + retrieved precedents
> Correct
> denotation?
> Incorrect
> Correct
> Budget remains
> Budget
> exhausted
> Episode finalized
> (Visible to later queries)
> Final SQL
> Earlier
> finalized
> memories
> Retrieved precedents
> Revised
> SQL
> Verified corrections and observed
> unsuccessful directions
> Online Dual-Polarity Memory

Figure 1: Overview of MERIT’s causal online repair process. A frozen LLM produces a shared initial SQL prediction. After an unsuccessful attempt, MERIT classifies the observed failure, retrieves experience from earlier finalized episodes, and generates one revision. A benchmark correctness oracle controls termination and memory polarity without exposing the reference SQL or result rows to the model. Current-query attempts remain local, and each finalized episode contributes at most one memory entry that becomes visible only to later queries. 

Causal, type-conditioned retrieval. Candidate construction is performed independently for po-larity p ∈ { +, −} . Let Lt,p ⊆ M p<t be the le-gal same-polarity pool after applying the temporal, query, and database constraints. Its same-type sub-set is Tt,p = {x ∈ L t,p : τx = τ (k−1)  

> t

}. Full MERIT selects 

Ct,p =

(

Tt,p , |T t,p | ≥ 3,

Lt,p , otherwise . (1) Thus, retrieval remains within the predicted type when at least three same-type entries exist in that polarity; otherwise, it falls back to the complete legal same-polarity pool. Dense and BM25 scores are independently min– max normalized within each selected polarity pool. Let bd(x, u ) and bb(x, u ) denote the normalized dense and BM25 scores of candidate x for retrieval context u = u(k) 

> t

. Full MERIT ranks candidates by 

r(x, u ) = 0 .75 bd(x, u ) + 0 .25 bb(x, u ).The retrieval query concatenates the current question, SQL, failure context, and error type. Dense similarity captures semantic relatedness, whereas BM25 preserves exact overlap in ques-tion terms, schema identifiers, failure context, and SQL changes. Positive and negative entries are ranked separately, and MERIT retrieves at most three positive and one negative entry. Encoder, in-dexing, serialization, normalization, BM25, and tie-breaking details are provided in Appendix D. 

Repair generation and validation. The repair prompt contains the question, schema, optional dataset evidence, current SQL, attempt status, DBMS error, predicted failure type, local history, and retrieved memories. Positive entries are pre-sented as confirmed successful directions, whereas negative entries are presented as observed unsuc-cessful directions. The reference SQL, reference rows, and corrected query are never included. MERIT provides no separate system prompt: each template is sent as one user message through the model’s chat template. MERIT Full does not generate local reflections. The frozen model gen-erates one revision y(k) 

> t

= P (p(k) 

> t

) using greedy decoding; complete prompts and memory serializa-tion are given in Appendix B. The revision is appended to the local history and evaluated by the benchmark oracle. If it is con-firmed correct, the episode terminates. Otherwise, MERIT reclassifies the resulting failure and repeats retrieval and generation while budget remains. 

Episode finalization and memory update. If repair succeeds at step k∗, MERIT creates one pos-itive entry from the final oracle-confirmed transi-tion y(k∗−1)  

> t

→ y(k∗) 

> t

. Intermediate unsuccessful attempts remain local. If no attempt is confirmed correct after K generations, MERIT creates at most one negative entry from the final observed direction 

y(K−1)  

> t

→ y(K) 

> t

.Let xt ∈ { x+ 

> t

, x − 

> t

, ∅} denote the finalized out-come; memory is updated only upon finalization 

M<(t+1) = M<t ∪  {xt} \ { ∅} (2) Episode t can therefore retrieve only experience from earlier completed queries, while its outcome becomes visible beginning at position t + 1 .43.3 Type-Reliability-Aware Retrieval Variant 

We additionally evaluate a controlled MERIT vari-ant that changes only how the predicted type affects candidate selection and ranking. It does not use a learned or calibrated confidence score. Instead, define h(τ ) = 1 for S YNTAX , S CHEMA LINKING ,and E XECUTION , and h(τ ) = 0 otherwise. These predefined high-reliability types are intended to be supported directly by observable DBMS diagnos-tics; the indicator is not estimated from validation data. For each polarity, the variant selects 

Crel  

> t,p

=

(

Tt,p , h(τ (k−1)  

> t

) = 1 ∧ |T t,p | ≥ 3,

Lt,p , otherwise . (3) Lower-reliability types use the full legal pool and receive a soft type-match bonus. Let rbase (x, u ) = 0.75 brdense (x, u ) + 0 .25 brBM25 (x, u ). The variant ranks candidates by rrel (x, u ) = rbase (x, u ) + 0.10  1 − h(τ )1[τx = τ ], where u = u(k) 

> t

and 

τ = τ (k−1)  

> t

. The bonus is therefore applied only to lower-reliability types and is disabled for high-reliability types, including small-pool fallback cases. Figure 2 illustrates a schema-linking episode. The initial query references a nonexistent column in Enrollment ; MERIT retrieves an earlier correc-tion involving the missing Courses join and uses it to generate a revision. The transition is stored as positive memory only after the benchmark oracle confirms the repaired query. 

4 Experiments 

4.1 Experimental Setup Datasets and evaluation. We evaluate on the development sets of Spider and BIRD, compris-ing 1,034 and 1,534 queries, respectively. Spi-der tests cross-domain generalization to unseen schemas, whereas BIRD contains larger databases, more domain-specific questions, and auxiliary evi-dence provided with each example. We score final predictions with the official execution evaluators. A query is counted as correct only when its denota-tion matches the evaluation target; successful exe-cution alone is insufficient. All prompt templates and memory-serialization formats are provided in Appendix B. 

Controlled initialization. All methods use the same frozen Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct backbone and the same cached initial SQL prediction for each query. These predictions are generated once with deterministic decoding and achieve 58 .90% execu-tion accuracy on Spider ( 609 /1,034 ) and 38 .40% 

on BIRD ( 589 /1,534 ). Initially correct queries are finalized immediately. For every initially incor-rect query, all methods receive the same execution feedback, decoding policy, and repair budget of 

K = 7 generations. The comparison therefore isolates differences in repair strategy rather than initial-generation quality. 

Causal stream protocol. We run each method under three query orders, denoted by seeds 0, 1,and 2. The shared initial predictions remain fixed; only the order in which episodes are processed changes. Within each seed, all methods observe the same stream. Memory-based methods start from an empty store and may retrieve only entries produced by completed episodes at earlier stream positions. Attempts from the current query remain in its local history and cannot enter global retrieval until the episode terminates. Each stream order therefore induces a distinct sequence of causally available experience. 

Comparison methods. Our principal baselines isolate the contribution of cross-query memory and its organization. ITERATIVE repairs using execution feedback and the current episode his-tory, but maintains no global memory. D YNAMIC 

RAG accumulates earlier repair experiences with-out MERIT’s polarity separation or hard type conditioning. REFLEXION -STYLE augments re-pair with verbal reflections derived from failed at-tempts. MERIT combines causal cross-query mem-ory, separate positive and negative pools, error-type conditioning, and hybrid lexical-dense rank-ing. MERIT (T YPE -RELIABILITY -AWARE ) is a controlled MERIT variant that applies hard filtering only to predefined high-reliability failure types and otherwise uses type agreement as a soft ranking bonus. 

Metrics and statistical analysis. We report final execution accuracy and the number of initially in-correct queries that are eventually repaired. Repair behavior is characterized by mean repair steps per initial failure and trajectory oscillation, while infer-ence cost is measured by total prompt and output tokens and LLM calls. Unless otherwise stated, results are the mean and sample standard deviation over the three stream orders. Because all methods are aligned on the same queries and initial predictions, we also perform 5: Show names of students who took CS101.                          

> Schema: Students(id, name),
> Courses(id, title),
> Enrollment(sid, cid)
> SELECT T1.name
> FROM Students AS T1
> JOIN Enrollment AS T2
> ON T1.id = T2.sid
> WHERE T2.title = 'CS101'
> "No such column: T2.title "
> Frozen LLM generates shared initial SQL
> Validation returns observable feedback
> Ordered DBMS-
> text rules
> First matching rule
> Schema linking
> Deterministic Error
> Classifier
> Positive Precedent
> ="Changed Enrollment to JOIN
> Courses on Enroll.cid=Courses.id"
> Context: "Enrollment to JOIN
> Courses on Enrollment"
> Dense embedding
> Retrieved positive
> precedent
> Current repair
> context
> Type-conditioned
> candidate pool
> SELECT T1.name
> FROM Students AS T1
> JOIN Enrollment AS T2
> ON T1.id = T2.sid
> JOIN Courses AS T3
> ON T2.cid = T3.id
> WHERE T3.title = 'CS101'
> Frozen LLM generates repair
> Prompt includes retrieved correction pattern
> 'h' = "Change Enrollment to JOIN
> Courses on Enroll.cid =
> Courses.id"
> Validation
> oracle
> matches the reference
> denotation
> Encode the failed-to-
> correct transition as
> positive memory
> Visible only to later queries

Initial prediction and feedback  Step 1: Error Classification  Step 2: Hybrid Retrieval  Step 3: LLM Generation  Step 4: Validation and 

Episode Finalization Figure 2: Example MERIT repair episode. The shared initial prediction references a nonexistent column, producing a schema-linking failure. MERIT retrieves an earlier correction involving the missing Courses join and uses it to generate a revision. After the benchmark correctness oracle confirms the repaired query, the failed-to-correct transition is stored as positive memory and becomes available only to later queries. Table 1: Execution accuracy over three stream orders. Values are mean ± sample standard deviation in per-centage points. Bold and underlined denote the best and second-best results within each dataset; tied best results are both bold. 

Method Exec. accuracy 

Spider 

Iterative 66 .34 ± 0.14 

Reflexion-style 68 .38 ± 0.12 

Dyn. RAG 69 .79 ± 0.28 

MERIT 69 .79 ± 0.59 

BIRD 

Iterative 47 .35 ± 0.04 

Reflexion-style 51 .24 ± 0.15 

Dyn. RAG 48 .15 ± 0.19 

MERIT 48 .44 ± 0.46 

paired query-level comparisons. For the three-seed analysis, we use a query-cluster bootstrap that re-samples each query once while keeping its out-comes across all three stream orders together. 

4.2 Results 

We analyze four questions: whether cross-query memory improves stateless repair, whether MERIT outperforms alternative memory organizations, how robust type conditioning is, and how repair gains trade off against inference cost. 

Does cross-query memory improve repair? On Spider, all memory-based methods improve over stateless I TERATIVE repair. MERIT and D YNAMIC 

RAG tie at 69 .79% , followed by R EFLEXION -

STYLE at 68 .38% and I TERATIVE at 66 .34% .MERIT’s 3.45 -point gain over I TERATIVE has a paired 95% confidence interval of [1 .97 , 4.96] , pro-viding clear evidence that earlier repair experi-ence benefits later queries. Its differences from 

Table 2: Paired query-level comparison of MERIT against the principal baselines and the type-reliability-aware MERIT variant. ∆ is MERIT minus the com-parison method. Intervals are obtained by resampling queries while preserving their outcomes across the three stream orders. 

Dataset Comparison ∆ pp 95% CI Spider Iterative +3 .45 [+1 .97 , +4 .96] 

Reflexion-style +1 .42 [−0.19 , +3 .03] 

Dyn. RAG 0.00 [−1.00 , +0 .97] 

MERIT (type-rel.) +0 .39 [−0.23 , +1 .03] 

BIRD Iterative +1 .09 [0 .00 , +2 .17] 

Reflexion-style −2.80 [−4.15 , −1.46] 

Dyn. RAG +0 .28 [−0.43 , +1 .00] 

MERIT (type-rel.) −0.20 [−0.67 , +0 .28] 

DYNAMIC RAG and R EFLEXION -STYLE are not reliably resolved because both intervals include zero. On BIRD, R EFLEXION -STYLE performs best at 51 .24% , followed by MERIT at 48 .44% ,DYNAMIC RAG at 48 .15% , and I TERATIVE at 

47 .35% . MERIT’s 1.09 -point gain over I TER -

ATIVE has an interval of [0 .00 , 2.17] , indicating weaker evidence than on Spider. 

Does structured memory outperform alternative memories? MERIT and D YNAMIC RAG are not reliably separated: they tie on Spider, and MERIT leads by only 0.28 points on BIRD. Thus, the re-sults do not establish an aggregate benefit from MERIT’s polarity separation and hard type condi-tioning over untyped dynamic retrieval. MERIT exceeds R EFLEXION -STYLE by 1.42 points on Spi-der, but the paired interval [−0.19 , 3.03] includes zero. On BIRD, R EFLEXION -STYLE leads MERIT by 2.80 points, with a MERIT-minus-Reflexion in-terval of [−4.15 , −1.46] , making it the strongest BIRD method. 6Table 3: Mean repair behavior and inference cost over three stream orders. “Rep.” is the number of initial fail-ures repaired; “Steps” is repair steps per initial failure; “Osc.” is the oscillation rate; and “Tok.” is total prompt and output tokens in millions. Bold and underlined de-note the best and second-best values within each dataset and metric.                                              

> Method Rep. ↑Steps ↓Osc. ↓Tok. ↓Calls ↓
> Spider
> Iterative 77.0 6.082 35.69 2.529 3619 Reflexion-style 98.0 5.821 32.69 6.597 6309 Dyn. RAG 112.7 5.631 32.20 5.275 3427
> MERIT 112.7 5.611 31.95 5.274 3419
> BIRD
> Iterative 137.3 6.238 54.52 9.325 7429 Reflexion-style 197.0 5.971 51.76 22.407 13568 Dyn. RAG 149.7 6.172 53.94 18.012 7366
> MERIT 154.0 6.128 53.13 17.569 7325

How robust is error-type conditioning? Hard and type-reliability-aware filtering are also not reli-ably distinguishable. Hard filtering changes mean accuracy by +0 .39 points on Spider and −0.20 

points on BIRD, with intervals of [−0.23 , 1.03] 

and [−0.67 , 0.28] , respectively. The opposite di-rections and zero-crossing intervals indicate that neither policy is uniformly better, supporting the use of error type as a coarse retrieval prior rather than a definitive partition. 

How does memory affect repair behavior? 

Memory primarily increases the number of ini-tially failed queries that are eventually repaired. On Spider, MERIT and D YNAMIC RAG each re-pair 112 .7 failures on average, compared with 98 .0

for R EFLEXION -STYLE and 77 .0 for I TERATIVE .MERIT also has the shortest trajectories and low-est oscillation, although its differences from D Y- 

> NAMIC

RAG are small. On BIRD, R EFLEXION - 

> STYLE

repairs the most failures ( 197 .0) and pro-duces the shortest, least oscillatory trajectories. MERIT ranks second with 154 .0 repaired failures, compared with 149 .7 for D YNAMIC RAG and 

137 .3 for I TERATIVE . Across both datasets, dif-ferences in trajectory length and oscillation are smaller than differences in repair success. 

What is the computational trade-off? Higher repair success comes with greater token use. On Spider, MERIT uses 5.274 million tokens and 

3,419 calls, compared with 2.529 million tokens and 3,619 calls for I TERATIVE . D YNAMIC RAG has nearly identical cost, whereas R EFLEXION - 

> STYLE

requires 6.597 million tokens and 6,309 

Table 4: Execution accuracy for MERIT ablations over three stream orders. ∆ is the change in percentage points relative to full MERIT. Bold and underlined de-note the best and second-best results within each dataset; tied best results are both bold.                                                              

> Variant Spider BIRD Exec. ∆Exec. ∆
> MERIT Full 69 .79 ±0.59 –48 .44 ±0.46 –Positive only 69 .66 ±0.53 −0.13 48 .35 ±0.72 −0.09
> No type filter 69 .21 ±0.15 −0.58 48 .57 ±0.49 +0 .13
> No dense rerank 68 .67 ±0.29 −1.12 48 .57 ±0.46 +0 .13
> No BM25 70 .37 ±0.20 +0 .58 48 .04 ±0.07 −0.40
> Random same type 69 .70 ±0.44 −0.09 48 .39 ±0.73 −0.05
> Cross-database only 68 .86 ±0.29 −0.93 45 .70 ±0.39 −2.74

calls. On BIRD, MERIT uses 17 .569 million tokens and 7,325 calls, compared with 9.325 

million tokens and 7,429 calls for I TERATIVE .REFLEXION -STYLE achieves the highest accuracy but is also the most expensive, requiring 22 .407 

million tokens and 13 ,568 calls. Thus, MERIT is less expensive than R EFLEXION -STYLE , but does not reduce absolute token consumption relative to stateless repair. 

5 Ablation Analysis 

We ablate memory polarity, error-type conditioning, lexical-dense ranking, and schema-local retrieval. All variants use the same frozen backbone, cached initial predictions, three causal stream orders, and repair budget K = 7 . Table 4 reports mean ex-ecution accuracy and sample standard deviation. Because several differences are small relative to run variation, we interpret the results as component trends rather than a strict ranking. 

How much does polarity contribute? Remov-ing negative memory changes accuracy only mod-estly: −0.13 points on Spider and −0.09 points on BIRD. These margins are small relative to varia-tion across stream orders, indicating that verified corrections provide most of the useful signal. Neg-ative entries still offer a limited warning against previously unsuccessful repair directions, but the results do not identify polarity separation as the principal source of MERIT’s gains. 

When does error typing help? Type-conditioned retrieval is more useful on Spider. Removing the type filter lowers accuracy by 0.58 

points, while Random Same Type remains only 

0.09 points below full MERIT. Thus, narrowing re-trieval to a plausible failure class already provides substantial structure, even before fine-grained ranking. Dense relevance remains important within 7that class: removing dense reranking produces the largest Spider decline among the retrieval ablations, 1.12 points. BIRD presents a different regime. No Type Filter and No Dense Rerank both reach 48 .57% ,only 0.13 points above full MERIT, while Random Same Type is 0.05 points below it. These differ-ences are small relative to their standard deviations and do not establish a preferred retrieval policy. The type-reliability-aware comparison in Table 2 leads to the same conclusion: hard filtering is fa-vored by 0.39 points on Spider and disfavored by 

0.20 points on BIRD, but both confidence intervals include zero. Error type is therefore useful as an organizing prior, particularly on Spider, rather than as a universally reliable retrieval boundary. 

How do lexical and dense ranking interact? 

The two retrieval channels behave differently across benchmarks. On Spider, removing dense reranking lowers accuracy by 1.12 points, whereas removing BM25 raises the mean by 0.58 points and reduces variance. This pattern suggests that seman-tic similarity is better aligned with transferable re-pair structure, while exact lexical overlap can favor surface-level matches. However, the paired interval for the No-BM25 comparison includes zero, so the evidence does not establish that lexical retrieval is reliably harmful. On BIRD, removing BM25 lowers accuracy by 0.40 points, while removing dense reranking changes the mean by only +0 .13 points. Exact overlap in table names, columns, and domain termi-nology may thus be more informative for BIRD’s larger and more specialized schemas. A fixed lexical–dense mixture provides a common retrieval policy, but the ablations show that the relative value of its channels is environment dependent. 

How transferable is repair experience across schemas? Schema locality produces the clearest and most consistent effect. Restricting retrieval to memories from other databases lowers accuracy by 0.93 points on Spider and 2.74 points on BIRD. Repair patterns do transfer across schemas, but cross-database analogies do not fully replace ex-perience from the target database. Same-database memories can preserve recurring join paths, table relationships, and domain terminology that are dif-ficult to recover from question similarity or failure type alone. The larger BIRD degradation high-lights the importance of schema-local experience in domain-specific databases.               

> Table 5: Initial-failure composition and provisional clas-sifier performance. Shares are percentages. “Result mismatch” denotes executable SQL with an incorrect denotation; “Other” aggregates Aggregation, Execution, Syntax, and Unknown.
> Dataset Result mismatch Schema linking Other Acc. (%) Macro-F1 Spider 84.71 12.24 3.06 48.71 0.317 BIRD 57.99 33.65 8.36 48.10 0.355

Error-classifier validation. Table 5 character-izes the operating regime of the deterministic clas-sifier over 425 Spider and 945 BIRD initial fail-ures. Spider is dominated by R ESULT MISMATCH 

(84 .71% ), whereas BIRD contains substantially more S CHEMA LINKING and other failure types. Despite this difference, accuracy remains near 48% 

on both datasets, with Macro-F1 scores of 0.317 

and 0.355 . These results show that the labels pro-vide useful but imperfect routing information rather than definitive diagnoses. We therefore use er-ror type as a coarse retrieval prior, retain a same-polarity fallback when the typed pool is small, and separately evaluate a type-reliability-aware policy that relaxes hard filtering for less reliable cate-gories. 

6 Conclusion 

We introduced MERIT, a training-free framework that learns from execution-guided Text-to-SQL re-pair through causal cross-query memory. MERIT clearly improves over stateless repair on Spider, while its BIRD gain is smaller; it is not reliably separated from Dynamic RAG on either bench-mark. The ablations show that polarity contributes modestly, retrieval design is dataset dependent, and schema-local experience is consistently valuable. These results support memory-based improvement without parameter updates, while showing that no single memory organization is uniformly best. 

7 Limitations 

MERIT assumes access to a denotation-level cor-rectness signal during repair. This is appropri-ate for controlled benchmark evaluation, but it is stronger than the feedback available in many de-ployed databases, where an agent may observe only execution errors, incomplete tests, or delayed user confirmation. Our experiments also use a single frozen backbone, Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct, and the de-velopment sets of Spider and BIRD. We therefore 8do not establish that the same gains or trade-offs hold for other model families, multilingual or con-versational Text-to-SQL, or production databases with different execution and security constraints. The method is sensitive to how experience is accumulated and organized. Memory contents depend on query order, and three stream orders capture only a limited portion of this variation. The deterministic classifier is also coarse: its population-weighted validation accuracy is approx-imately 48% , and the broad Result Mismatch cate-gory combines multiple underlying semantic errors. This limits how strongly the results can support hard type-conditioned retrieval and helps explain why relaxed filtering remains competitive on BIRD. We also fix the retrieval weights, memory alloca-tion, and fallback policy across both benchmarks rather than conducting a comprehensive sensitivity study. Finally, MERIT is not cheaper than stateless re-pair in total token use. Although it repairs more failures and makes slightly fewer model calls, re-trieved memories lengthen each prompt, resulting in substantially higher token consumption. Our ac-counting includes LLM prompt and output tokens but excludes embedding computation, indexing, re-trieval latency, and memory-maintenance overhead. The comparison set also focuses on matched repair and memory strategies rather than every special-ized Text-to-SQL agent, so the results should be interpreted as evidence about cross-query memory design, not as a claim of state-of-the-art Text-to-SQL performance. 

References 

Arian Askari, Christian Poelitz, and Xinye Tang. 2025. MAGIC: Generating self-correction guideline for in-context text-to-SQL. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 39(22):23433– 23441. Eric Chau and Matt Peters. 2025. Making SQL exe-cutable with execution-guided text-to-SQL: A repro-ducible study on WikiSQL-style queries. Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning Review , 6(3):1– 17. Xinyun Chen, Maxwell Lin, Nathanael Schärli, and Denny Zhou. 2024. Teaching large language models to self-debug. In The Twelfth International Confer-ence on Learning Representations .Yaxun Dai, Wenxuan Xie, Xialie Zhuang, Tianyu Yang, Ziyi Liu, Haiqin Yang, Yiying Yang, Yuhang Zhao, Pingfu Chao, and Wenhao Jiang. 2026. ReEx-SQL: Reasoning with execution-aware reinforcement learn-ing for text-to-SQL. In Proceedings of the 64th An-nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 824–847, San Diego, California, United States. Association for Computational Linguistics. Minghang Deng, Ashwin Ramachandran, Canwen Xu, Lanxiang Hu, Zhewei Yao, Anupam Datta, and Hao Zhang. 2025. ReFoRCE: A text-to-SQL agent with self-refinement, format restriction, and column ex-ploration. In ICLR 2025 Workshop on VerifAI: AI Verification in the Wild .Dawei Gao, Haibin Wang, Yaliang Li, Xiuyu Sun, Yichen Qian, Bolin Ding, and Jingren Zhou. 2024. Text-to-SQL empowered by large language models: A benchmark evaluation. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment , 17(5):1132–1145. Yue Gong, Chuan Lei, Xiao Qin, Kapil Vaidya, Bal-akrishnan Narayanaswamy, and Tim Kraska. 2025. SQLens: An end-to-end framework for error detec-tion and correction in text-to-SQL. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 38. Zhibin Gou, Zhihong Shao, Yeyun Gong, Yelong Shen, Yujiu Yang, Nan Duan, and Weizhu Chen. 2024. CRITIC: Large language models can self-correct with tool-interactive critiquing. In The Twelfth Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations .Jie Huang, Xinyun Chen, Swaroop Mishra, Huaixiu Steven Zheng, Adams Wei Yu, Xiny-ing Song, and Denny Zhou. 2024. Large language models cannot self-correct reasoning yet. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations .Shuai Lyu, Haoran Luo, Zhonghong Ou, Yifan Zhu, Xi-aoran Shang, Yang Qin, and Meina Song. 2025. SQL-o1: A self-reward heuristic dynamic search method for text-to-SQL. Preprint , arXiv:2502.11741. Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, Shashank Gupta, Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder, Katherine Hermann, Sean Welleck, Amir Yazdan-bakhsh, and Peter Clark. 2023. Self-refine: Iterative refinement with self-feedback. In Advances in Neu-ral Information Processing Systems , volume 36. Wenxin Mao, Ruiqi Wang, Jiyu Guo, Jichuan Zeng, Cuiyun Gao, Peiyi Han, and Chuanyi Liu. 2024. En-hancing text-to-SQL parsing through question rewrit-ing and execution-guided refinement. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 , pages 2009–2024, Bangkok, Thailand. Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics. Charles Packer, Sarah Wooders, Kevin Lin, Vivian Fang, Shishir G. Patil, Ion Stoica, and Joseph E. Gonzalez. 2023. MemGPT: Towards LLMs as operating sys-tems. Preprint , arXiv:2310.08560. 

9Joon Sung Park, Joseph O’Brien, Carrie Jun Cai, Mered-ith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S. Bern-stein. 2023. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. In Proceedings of the 36th An-nual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology , New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Mohammadreza Pourreza, Hailong Li, Ruoxi Sun, Yeounoh Chung, Shayan Talaei, Gaurav Tarlok Kakkar, Yu Gan, Amin Saberi, Fatma Ozcan, and Sercan Arik. 2025. CHASE-SQL: Multi-path reason-ing and preference optimized candidate selection in text-to-SQL. In The Thirteenth International Confer-ence on Learning Representations .Mohammadreza Pourreza and Davood Rafiei. 2023. DIN-SQL: Decomposed in-context learning of text-to-SQL with self-correction. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36. Jiawei Shen, Chengcheng Wan, Ruoyi Qiao, Jiazhen Zou, Hang Xu, Yuchen Shao, Yueling Zhang, Weikai Miao, and Geguang Pu. 2026. Understanding, de-tecting, and repairing real-world in-context-learning-based text-to-SQL errors. Proceedings of the ACM on Software Engineering , 3(FSE):3722–3745. Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik R. Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. 2023. Re-flexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , volume 36. Ruoxi Sun, Sercan O. Arik, Alexandre Muzio, Lesly Miculicich, Satya Kesav Gundabathula, Pengcheng Yin, Hanjun Dai, Hootan Nakhost, Rajarishi Sinha, Zifeng Wang, and Tomas Pfister. 2024. SQL-paLM: Improved large language model adaptation for text-to-SQL. Transactions on Machine Learning Research .Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2023. ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations .Hanchong Zhang, Ruisheng Cao, Lu Chen, Hongshen Xu, and Kai Yu. 2023. ACT-SQL: In-context learning for text-to-SQL with automatically-generated chain-of-thought. In Findings of the Association for Com-putational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 , pages 3501– 3532, Singapore. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Andrew Zhao, Daniel Huang, Quentin Xu, Matthieu Lin, Yong-Jin Liu, and Gao Huang. 2024. ExpeL: LLM agents are experiential learners. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,38(17):19632–19642. Yicong Zhao, Shisong Chen, Jiacheng Zhang, and Zhixu Li. 2025. ReCode: Improving LLM-based code re-pair with fine-grained retrieval-augmented generation. In Proceedings of the 34th ACM International Con-ference on Information and Knowledge Management ,pages 4368–4378, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Wanjun Zhong, Lianghong Guo, Qiqi Gao, He Ye, and Yanlin Wang. 2024. MemoryBank: Enhancing large language models with long-term memory. Proceed-ings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,38(17):19724–19731. 

10 A MERIT Correction–Accumulation Loop B Prompt Templates 

MERIT supplies no separate system prompt. Each template below is passed as a single user message through the model’s native chat template. Place-holders enclosed in braces are replaced at infer-ence time. Spider omits all BIRD-specific evidence blocks. MERIT Full does not generate local reflec-tions, so the corresponding field in its repair prompt is always rendered as (none) .

B.1 Shared Initial SQL Generation 

The same initial-generation prompt is used to pro-duce the cached SQL prediction shared by all repair methods. The prompt-version identifier is spider-initial-v3 or bird-initial-v3 , de-pending on the benchmark. 

Listing 1: Shared initial SQL-generation prompt. 

PROMPT_VERSION: {spider-initial-v3 | bird-initial-v3} You are an expert SQLite developer. Produce one SQL query for the question. DATABASE SCHEMA: {DATABASE_SCHEMA} {BIRD_CONTEXT_IF_APPLICABLE} QUESTION: {QUESTION} RULES: - Use only exact table and column names from the schema. - Do not create table or column aliases with AS. - Return exactly one query; do not provide alternatives. - Put the final SQL between <answer> and </answer> tags. 

For BIRD, BIRD_CONTEXT_IF_APPLICABLE is replaced with the following block. Spider receives no corresponding block. 

Listing 2: BIRD-specific evidence block for initial gen-eration. 

EXTERNAL KNOWLEDGE / EVIDENCE: {BIRD_EVIDENCE} BIRD RULES: - Implement the evidence formula or computation exactly. - Wrap column names containing spaces or special characters in backticks, for example ‘Column Name‘. 

B.2 MERIT Repair Generation 

Listing 3 gives the central repair prompt used af-ter an unsuccessful SQL attempt. The prompt contains the current failure signal, complete local attempt history, and retrieved positive and nega-tive memories. The prompt-version identifier is 

spider-repair-v3 or bird-repair-v3 .

Listing 3: MERIT repair prompt. 

PROMPT_VERSION: {spider-repair-v3 | bird-repair-v3} You are an expert SQLite developer repairing an unsuccessful query. CONFIRMED SUCCESSFUL REPAIR DIRECTIONS: {RETRIEVED_POSITIVE_MEMORIES_OR_(none)} OBSERVED FAILED DIRECTIONS: {RETRIEVED_NEGATIVE_MEMORIES_OR_(none)} LOCAL REFLECTIONS FROM THIS EPISODE: (none) CURRENT FEEDBACK: Status: {DENOTATION_MISMATCH | EXECUTION_ERROR | TIMEOUT} Current error type: {ERROR_TYPE} DB error: {DATABASE_ERROR_OR_(none)} DATABASE SCHEMA: {DATABASE_SCHEMA} {BIRD_CONTEXT_IF_APPLICABLE} QUESTION: {QUESTION} LOCAL ATTEMPT HISTORY: {ALL_PREVIOUS_SQL_ATTEMPTS} REPAIR RULES: - Produce a new SQL query rather than repeating a prior attempt. - Use only exact table and column names from the schema. - Treat failed directions only as observed evidence; do not invent a reason. - Put exactly one final SQL query between <answer> and </answer> tags. 

For BIRD, the schema section is followed by the same evidence block shown in Listing 2. 

B.3 Memory Serialization 

Retrieved positive memories are rendered as veri-fied failed-to-correct transitions: 

Listing 4: Positive-memory serialization. 

[Confirmed successful repair {INDEX}] Entry ID: {ENTRY_ID} Error type: {ERROR_TYPE} Failure context: {PREVIOUS_FAILURE_CONTEXT} Observed successful direction: {FAILED_SQL_TO_CORRECT_SQL_TRANSITION} SQL delta: {SQL_CHANGE} 

Negative memories describe only an observed unsuccessful direction and its recorded outcome: 

Listing 5: Negative-memory serialization. 

[OBSERVED FAILED DIRECTION {INDEX}] Entry ID: {ENTRY_ID} Error type: {ERROR_TYPE} Failure context: {FAILURE_CONTEXT} Attempted SQL delta: {SQL_CHANGE} Observed outcome: {OUTCOME} Observed DB error: {DATABASE_ERROR} 

The complete local trajectory is serialized in chronological order. Because repair is invoked only after an unsuccessful attempt, every SQL query in-cluded in this block has already been observed to be incorrect. 

Listing 6: Local attempt-history serialization. 

11 Algorithm 1 MERIT causal correction-accumulation loop 

Require: Ordered stream {(qt, S t, a t, D t, y (0) 

t )}Nt=1 , parser P , evaluator V , budget K

1: M+ ← ∅; M− ← ∅

2: for t = 1 , . . . , N do 

3: Evaluate shared prediction y(0) 

t

4: if y(0) 

t is correct then 

5: Finalize without creating repair memory 

6: continue 

7: end if 

8: Ht ← [y(0) 

t ]; solved ← false 

9: for k = 1 , . . . , K do 

10: Classify the current failure type τ (k−1) 

t

11: Construct the legal earlier-memory pool 

12: Retrieve up to three positive and one negative entries 

13: Build prompt from current context, Ht, and retrieval 

14: Generate one repair y(k)

t ← P (p(k)

t )

15: Append y(k)

t to Ht and evaluate it 

16: if y(k)

t is correct then 

17: Encode final failed-to-correct transition as x+

t

18: solved ← true 

19: break 

20: end if 

21: end for 

22: if ¬solved then 

23: Encode final unsuccessful direction as x−

t

24: end if 

25: Insert finalized xt into memory ▷ visible only for positions > t 

26: end for 

> [Attempt 1 - observed unsuccessful] {INITIAL_SQL} [Attempt 2 - observed unsuccessful] {FIRST_REPAIR_SQL} ... [Attempt N - observed unsuccessful] {LATEST_REPAIR_SQL}

B.4 Reflexion-Style Baseline 

The following prompt is used only by the Reflexion-style baseline and is not used by MERIT Full. It asks the frozen model to summarize the observed trajectory without generating another SQL query or asserting an unobserved failure cause. The prompt-version identifier is spider-reflection-v3 or 

bird-reflection-v3 .

Listing 7: Reflection-generation prompt used by the Reflexion-style baseline. 

> PROMPT_VERSION: {spider-reflection-v3 | bird-reflection-v3} Write a concise debugging reflection using only the observed attempt outcomes. Do not claim an unobserved cause and do not produce the next SQL query. DATABASE SCHEMA: {DATABASE_SCHEMA} {BIRD_CONTEXT_IF_APPLICABLE} QUESTION: {QUESTION} CURRENT ERROR TYPE: {ERROR_TYPE} ATTEMPTS AND OBSERVED OUTCOMES: [Attempt 1] SQL: {SQL_1} Outcome: status={STATUS_1}; db_error={ERROR_1_OR_(none)} [Attempt 2] SQL: {SQL_2} Outcome: status={STATUS_2}; db_error={ERROR_2_OR_(none)} ... Put the reflection between <reflection> and </reflection> tags.

C Deterministic Online Error Classifier 

The online classifier is conservative and uses only observed DBMS diagnostics and execution status. 12 It does not inspect the SQL abstract syntax tree or infer semantic errors from query structure. Rules are evaluated in the order shown in Table 6, and the first matching rule determines the output. The classifier does not diagnose join, ordering, limit, aggregation logic, or other semantic subtypes from SQL shape. Any broader semantic taxonomy used for manual analysis is therefore distinct from the labels produced by the online classifier. 

D Retrieval and Implementation Details 

Table 7 reports the executed configuration used for the main MERIT experiments and its retrieval-policy variants. 

Dense retrieval. The dense encoder is 

BAAI/bge-large-en-v1.5 at the revision listed in Table 7. Sentence Transformers 3.2.1 produces L2-normalized vectors, which are stored in a FAISS IndexFlatIP index. Dense relevance is the inner product of the normalized query and memory vectors and is therefore equivalent to cosine similarity. The dense retrieval query concatenates the cur-rent question, current SQL, current failure context, and predicted error type. Dense memory text con-catenates the source question, source schema, fail-ure context, normalized SQL transformation, error type, observed outcome, and observed DBMS er-ror. 

Lexical retrieval. The lexical channel uses a cus-tom BM25 implementation. Both retrieval queries and memory documents are lowercased and tok-enized with [a-z0-9_]+ . For query q and candi-date memory m, the lexical score is 

BM25( q, m ) = X

> w∈q

IDF( w) g(w, m ) (4) where the term-frequency saturation factor is 

g(w, m ) = tf( w, m )( k1 + 1) tf( w, m ) + k1

 1 − b + b|m|/¯ℓ (5) and the inverse-document-frequency term is 

IDF( w) = log 



1 + N − df( w) + 0 .5df( w) + 0 .5



(6) where N is the number of memories in the selected candidate polarity pool, df( w) is the number of memories containing token w, tf( w, m ) is its fre-quency in m, and ℓ is the mean document length in that pool. We use k1 = 1 .5 and b = 0 .75 . Corpus statistics are recomputed after candidate selection, independently for the positive and negative pools. BM25 memory text contains the source question, failure context, SQL delta, error type, observed outcome, observed DBMS error, and observed suc-cessful direction when one exists. 

Normalization and hybrid ranking. Dense and BM25 scores are normalized independently within each selected candidate polarity pool. For score function s, candidate m, and pool Ct,p , normaliza-tion is 

bs(m) = 



s(m) − smin 

smax − smin 

, smax > s min ,

0, otherwise ,

(7) where smin and smax are computed over Ct,p . Full MERIT then ranks candidates using 0.75 bsdense +0.25 bsBM25 , as defined in the full-MERIT rank-ing function. Positive and negative memories are ranked separately, and retrieval returns at most three positive and one negative entry. For the type-reliability-aware variant, the 0.10 

type-match bonus is applied only to lower-reliability predicted types, as specified by the type-reliability-aware ranking function. Ranking ties are resolved by descending dense score, descend-ing BM25 score, descending type-match score, and finally ascending deterministic memory ID. 

Memory and generation configuration. Mem-ory entries use format version 3 and are stored in separate positive and negative JSONL files. Posi-tive entries contain an oracle-confirmed failed-to-correct transition, whereas negative entries contain the final observed unsuccessful direction from an unresolved episode. Entries are indexed only after episode finalization. All methods use the merit-prompts-v3 prompt family and the same greedy decoding configuration. Sampling is disabled, temperature is zero, and each initially incorrect query receives at most seven re-pair generations after the shared initial prediction. The complete prompt and memory-serialization templates are provided in Appendix B. 13 Table 6: Ordered deterministic rules used by the online failure classifier. 

Observed DBMS status or text Type Subtype 

no such table: Schema Linking Missing Table 

no such column: Schema Linking Missing Column 

no such view: Schema Linking Missing View 

ambiguous column name: Schema Linking Ambiguous Column 

no such function: Syntax Unknown Function 

syntax error , incomplete input , or 

unrecognized token 

Syntax Parse Failure 

misuse of aggregate or aggregate functions are not allowed 

Aggregation DBMS Aggregate Misuse 

datatype mismatch or type mismatch Filter/Value Type Mismatch Attempted write under read-only execution Execution Read Only Violation Database not found Execution DB Not Found TIMEOUT status or text containing timed out Execution Timeout Other nonempty DBMS error Unknown Unknown Executable query with incorrect denotation Result Mismatch Unknown 

Table 7: Executed retrieval, memory, generation, and feedback settings. 

Component Setting Dense encoder BAAI/bge-large-en-v1.5 

Encoding Sentence Transformers 3.2.1 with L2-normalized embeddings Dense similarity Inner product between normalized vectors, equivalent to cosine similarity Dense index FAISS IndexFlatIP , FAISS GPU 1.9.0.0 BM25 implementation Custom in-project implementation; the pinned rank-bm25 package is not called BM25 tokenization Lowercasing followed by the regular expression [a-z0-9_]+ 

BM25 parameters k1 = 1 .5 and b = 0 .75 

Score normalization Independent min–max normalization within each selected candidate polarity pool Main ranking 0.75 bsdense + 0 .25 bsBM25 

Retrieval limits At most three positive and one negative memory Typed threshold Three same-type entries, applied independently within each polarity Prompt format merit-prompts-v3 

Decoding Greedy decoding, sampling disabled, and temperature 0

Repair budget Seven repair generations after the shared initial prediction 

14