Title: Oracles That Cannot Fail: Anchoring and the Expectation That Moves With the Fault

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.17214v1

Published Time: Wed, 19 Aug 2026 00:19:24 GMT

Number of Pages: 34

Markdown Content:
# Oracles That Cannot Fail: Anchoring and the Expectation That Moves With the Fault 

## Arquimedes Canedo 

## canedo@sector.mx 

ORCID 0000-0003-3506-6563 

Abstract 

A test oracle that obtains its expected value from the system it is judging cannot fail. If a fault moves measurement and expectation together the comparison cancels exactly, and no generated input will reveal it. The defect is in the oracle and not in the input space. We call this 

oracle anchoring . An expectation is specification-anchored when composed from values fixed outside the code under mutation, and state-anchored when it flows, directly or transitively, from that code. The expected-value form is named in the test-smell literature but not measured in any study we retrieved. We name three further channels by which such a value reaches a verdict, restrict the predicate to values flowing from the mutate target, and measure it. The subject is a deployed air traffic control simulator with 12 model-free property suites. Across 4 modules and 366 mutants these add 3 mutants of detection over the hand-written tests, while remaining 6 to 33 times as efficient per test. We then intervene three times, predicting each outcome first. Re-anchoring one holding oracle on published procedure, changing no production code, recovers 8 of 46; state-anchoring a healthy debounce oracle costs 4 of 19; and a reference model on that population kills exactly what specification anchoring kills, placing the risk in anchoring and not in model-freedom. Of 6 instances ablated, the two sizing their comparison carry 11 of the 12 recovered mutants. The published smell rule would revert our repair. Writing the oracle this analysis said was missing then exposed two defects deployment had not surfaced. All measurements come from one system by one author. 

Keywords: test oracles; oracle anchoring; mutation testing; mutation analysis; property-based testing; test smells; software testing 

# 1 Introduction 

An air traffic control simulator is judged on whether its aircraft behave plausibly, and the behaviors that carry that judgment are almost all temporal. An eligibility prompt must persist across a brief geometric dropout but not indefinitely. An approach must progress through its phases in order and without skipping. A holding pattern must circulate over its fix rather than beside it. A resolution advisory must override every controller command for as long as it is active and no longer. These are not properties of a single output value. They are properties of a trajectory through state, and they fail in orderings, in time-step chunkings, and in starting geometries that a software engineer does not think to enumerate. Two production defects in our simulator motivated the work reported here, one week apart, both at the same waypoint on the same arrival. In the first, raw approach eligibility flickered every frame while an aircraft flew a base leg. The data tag never escalated and the aircraft rejected 1arXiv:2608.17214v1 [cs.SE] 17 Aug 2026 course          

> r
> FIX
> 2rmaxXte
> (a) the specification’s speed
> 230 kt
> maxXte /2r=1.00 inside the ±6% band
> FIX
> 2r′maxXte ′
> (b) the mutant’s speed
> 200 kt, radius 24% smaller
> maxXte ′/2r′=1.00 inside the ±6% band
> both sides moved by 0.76

Figure 1: The paper’s central instance, drawn to scale. A holding pattern is a racetrack an aircraft flies repeatedly over a fix; its across-course width is exactly twice the turn radius r, so the maximum cross-track excursion maxXte measures that width. A speed-table mutation taking 230 to 200 knots shrinks the bank-limited radius by (200 /230 )2 = 0.76, and panel (b) is drawn at that scale. The aircraft is the same size in both panels, because the mutation shrinks the pattern and not the aeroplane. The result is visibly wrong, and 24% is far outside the ±6% band the property test allows. The oracle passes anyway, having sized its band by calling the same turn-radius function at the same wrong speed. Section 7 measures what that costs. clearances a controller could see it should accept. The remedy is a debounce , named for the way a mechanical switch contact bounces and reports several presses for one. It holds a flickering value steady across brief dropouts and releases it only once the signal has stayed away long enough to mean it. In the second, an aircraft assigned a hold flew a stable, correctly shaped racetrack 8.5 nautical miles (NM) from the fix it was supposed to orbit, and never crossed it. A holding pattern 

is a racetrack an aircraft flies repeatedly over a fix, so orbiting the right shape beside the wrong point is a complete failure of the procedure, and Figure 1 draws the geometry this paper needs from it. In both cases the example tests covering the code passed. In the second case a dedicated property suite for the holding state machine also passed throughout, because every oracle in it concerned the sequence of legs and none concerned where the aircraft was. We responded by adopting invariant-first, model-free property testing for temporal behavior, and by writing 12 such suites. This paper does not argue that this was the right response. It asks the question the suites themselves cannot answer. Do these oracles detect anything? The question is not rhetorical. A property test that passes tells you nothing about whether it would fail. Our discipline included a manual check in which each oracle was run against a hand-picked one-line mutation of the code it judges, but a hand-picked mutation is chosen by the same person who wrote the oracle, and it therefore inherits that person’s blind spots. Mutation testing [17, 35] replaces the hand-picked mutation with a mechanically generated population, and mutation analysis of the resulting kill sets is how we measure these oracles. The answer we measured is unflattering and, we will argue, structural in origin. Across 4 modules and 366 distinct mutants, the invariant suites kill 3 mutants that the pre-existing hand-written tests do not. The explanation is not that the properties were written carelessly. It is that several of them obtain the value they assert against from the very code they are judging, so a fault moves both sides of the comparison at once and the assertion remains true by construction. We call this property of an oracle its anchoring .2MUTATE TARGET holdGeometry.ts                     

> a value that flows from here makes an expectation state-anchored
> scenario the run twoR = 2 * holdTurnRadiusNM( ac.trueAirspeedKt)
> 0.94 ·twoR ≤maxXte ≤1.06 ·twoR
> ±6%, fixed literals written in the test, so this one is specification-anchored
> composed outside the target, so nothing the mutation touches can move it
> ④generator
> runs before any assertion exists
> +0①expected value
> +1
> ③conditioning variable realized state, +8
> measured maxXte expected twoR
> ②tolerance band

Figure 2: The four channels, located in the study’s costliest oracle. Three lie in the assertion and one upstream of it. Two share a single line. The yardstick twoR , the value the assertion compares the measurement against, is computed by the module under mutation ( ①) and evaluated at the aircraft’s realized true airspeed ( ③). Closing the first recovers 1 mutant, the second 8, which is why naming the defect and knowing what it costs are different things. The tolerance band ( ②) is composed from literals fixed in the test, so nothing flows to it from the target. It is the one channel of the four for which we found no anchored instance in any of the 12 suites, and Table 4 carries the recovery figures. Anchoring is binary, decidable without running anything, and relative to a declared mutate target. An oracle is specification-anchored when its expected value is composed from constants, published procedures or values fixed outside that target, and state-anchored when the expected value flows, directly or transitively, from the code being mutated. A value reaches an oracle by one of four routes, which we call channels . Three lie in the assertion and one lies upstream of it: the expected value the assertion compares against; the width of a tolerance band ; a conditioning variable the assertion is evaluated at; and a generator that places the scenario, which runs before any assertion exists. Only the first is named in the prior literature. The 4 are not conjuncts of a compound assertion: an oracle makes one comparison, and the channels are four ways the mutated code can reach into its terms. Figure 2 locates all four in the holding suite, the study’s costliest instance, where two of them sit in a single line. Closing the expected-value channel recovers 1 mutant and closing the conditioning variable recovers 8 more, and the distance between naming this defect and knowing what it costs is what the rest of the paper is for. A mutant is recovered when it survived the run before an intervention and is killed by the run after it, over the same population under the same pinned seed. Recovery is therefore a transition between two runs rather than a mutant status, and we report it by mutant identity rather than as a difference of two scores. 3That measurement is where the study started and it is not what the paper is about. A mutant is 

property-only when the property suites kill it and the hand-written tests do not. Counting those is how this paper measures what the property suites add , rather than what they detect on their own, and the count runs one way: the reverse figure, mutants the hand-written tests kill alone, is 64. A property-only count from one system, whose two suites were written by the same person, is worth little on its own, and the closest published comparison already reports the same direction over 40 projects [49]. What the rest of this paper does is intervene on anchoring instead of observing it: we remove it from one oracle and detection rises, we insert it into a healthy one and detection falls, and we hold one oracle fixed while moving only the declared mutate target and watch the same repair become inert. Each effect was predicted before it was measured, and the prediction was committed as its own revision beforehand, in order to maintain a strict experimental methodology. It is the interventions, and not the property-only column, that we ask a reader to weigh. 

Research questions. The measurement that started the study is RQ1, and it is the least of the five. The paper is about RQ2 to RQ5.      

> RQ1 Over identical mutant populations, what do the invariant property suites detect that the pre-existing hand-written example tests do not?
> RQ2 Where a property suite detects little, what is the cause, and is it a property of the oracle or of the code it judges?
> RQ3 Can that cause be intervened on, in both directions, with the effect predicted in advance?
> RQ4 How prevalent is it, and does its presence reliably cost detection?
> RQ5 Is anchoring a property of the oracle alone, or of the oracle together with the code under test?

RQ1 is answered in Section 5, RQ2 in Section 6, RQ3 and RQ4 in Section 7, and RQ5 in Section 7.5. 

Contributions. We claim the following, and we state at each point what the prior literature al-ready holds. 1. A channel taxonomy and a provenance restriction. The defect is already named at the expected-value channel, under at least 4 names [22, 57, 51], and separately as a soundness caveat in hardware assertion mining [67]. We do not claim the name. We name the same defect at three further channels, a tolerance-band width, a conditioning variable read at eval-uation time, and a scenario-placing generator, and we restrict the predicate to values that flow from the module under mutation, which is strictly narrower than "computed during the test" and is the version that determines killability. 2. The first measurement of the cost. Every prior source we retrieved motivates the smell by readability or maintainability. On one 46-mutant population, anchoring accounts for 9 mutants, 8 of them from a single instance. The channel the literature has named cost us nothing, because the hand-written tests happened to kill its one mutant anyway. The channel nobody has named is the only place on that module where the property suite catches something those tests miss. 43. A bidirectional intervention. Removing state anchoring recovers 8 mutants on holding geometry; introducing it costs 4 on the debounce. On the same debounce population a reference-model suite kills exactly what the specification-anchored properties kill, which grounds the model-freedom argument in a measurement. 4. Anchoring is scope-relative, and we measure it instead of asserting it. One unchanged oracle, run against two declared mutate targets that differ only in whether they contain the code producing the value it reads, recovers nothing under one declared target and 3 mutants under the other. All 3 of the recovered mutants lie in that producer and none in the region the oracle exists to test. This also discriminates anchoring from the obvious rival explana-tion, propagation distance, which predicts no difference between the two cells because the oracle and the code producing its anchor are identically placed in both. Section 10 sets that comparison out. 5. Anchoring is a provenance property that published oracle adequacy metrics cannot see. 

Every metric surveyed by Hossain and Dwyer [27], the model-checking coverage taxonomy [12], and current hardware assertion-quality metrics [67] measure forward influence. A self-referential oracle scores perfectly on all of them. 6. A property-only result stated against a measured baseline. 3 mutants of 366 as the suites were found, 4 once one of them is re-anchored. Ravi and Coblenz [49] report the same direction over 40 Python projects, where unit tests outkill property tests roughly 3 to 1 in aggregate; where we differ is in overlap , near-total here against 15% of found mutations caught by both styles there. Per test our properties remain 6 to 33 times as efficient, so this is not a claim that property tests are weak, and any general subsumption claim is false in both datasets. 7. A scope condition with an external consequence. State anchoring is fatal only when the observed state and the mutated code are the same artifact. An oracle that reads realized positions from a separate simulator is therefore unexposed to it [42], while ours is exposed, because our flight model and the code under test are one artifact. 

# 2 Background and related work 

Oracle assessment by mutation testing. That an oracle has a quality independent of the code it exercises, and that mutation testing is the instrument for measuring it, is established. Jahangirova et al. define oracle false positives and false negatives and search for each [31, 33]. Their false-negative criterion is our diagnostic signature written out formally. The mutant is strongly killed, the conditions in the assertions do not change value, and at least one variable visible at the assertion point differs. OASIs packages the technique as a tool [32]. Vera-Pérez et al. partition undetected mutants into no-infection, no-propagation and weak-oracle symptoms and measure the split [63]. Terragni et al. automate the improvement loop and impose a discipline we do not, using different mutation tools for improvement and for validation to avoid circularity [60]. Fraser and Zeller [21], and Konstantinou et al. for large language models [39], report the generated-oracle form of the same failure, assertions that encode implemented rather than intended behavior. Huo and Clause 5come closest to a provenance analysis, and they point the other way. OraclePolish traces whether a value compared inside an assertion descends from an input the test controls [29]. An oracle that is self-referential in our sense is therefore well behaved in their terms, because its expected value descends from a call the test itself makes. Barr et al. supply the taxonomy within which the defect sits [6]. Mutation analysis as an oracle-deficiency detector is not ours. What is ours is that the reaching half of this defect class is decidable on the import-and-call graph, without executing anything and without a mutant population, which is what every detector in this cluster requires. 

Only the flow half of the predicate is decidable; the sizing half, which separates a costly instance from a free one in Section 7, required reading each oracle. 

Test smells and tautological assertions. This is the nearest prior art and it owns the naming of our first channel. Garousi and Küçük’s multivocal review records "the ugly mirror (also known as Tautological tests)" [22]. The Open Catalog of Test Smells carries Self-Test , The Ugly Mirror 

and Test Tautology as separate entries [57]. Self-Test is our expected-value channel exactly, defined as tests that do not compare a result with an expected value but with the result itself. Its worked example builds the expectation by calling a different method of the same production class, which is the module-scoped form of the predicate rather than a method-scoped one. Rwemalika et al. go furthest and give a computable detector: the expected value should be a constant or a reference to a constant and not computed during the test [51]. None of these sources connects the smell to fault detection, none runs mutation testing, and Rwemalika et al. state the impact of this smell as readability. The shipping tools implement less than the prose. A rule-by-rule sweep of eslint-plugin-jest [34], eslint-plugin-vitest [65], tsDetect [61], RTj [43, 44] and SonarQube’s assertion rules [58] found no implementation of the provenance predicate; the Open Catalog’s 518 defined entries ship documentation and no detector at all. Every near miss decides inside the assertion ex-pression, on either syntactic identity of the operands or static decidability of the outcome. SonarJS rule S5914 comes closest, and it comes at the question from the opposite side. It reports a defect when “the value is freshly created here, so the result is independent of the code under test”, and it decides that by constant folding and fresh-reference detection. Independence of the result is its defect; provenance of the expected value is ours. The rule is therefore silent on an expected value built by calling the module under mutation. 

Tests that pass without discriminating. The nearest published defect class with a working de-tector is the complement of ours. A rotten green test passes while containing an assertion that is never executed, detected by pairing a static call-tree analysis with call-site-granular instrumen-tation [16, 2, 50]. Vera-Pérez et al. approach the same question from the production side with pseudo-tested methods [62], and Betka and Wagner give the closest thing to a taxonomy of why a test failed to discriminate [9]. Zhang and Mesbah establish that assertion quantity and assertion coverage correlate with mutation-measured effectiveness [68]. We find the converse. Our ablation 

closes one value flow at a time against a fixed mutant population, and it moves detection from 26.09 to 45.65% without adding an assertion. States A0 through A3a have identical assertion coverage. 

Their defect is an assertion that never runs; ours is an assertion that runs, reads the infected state, and returns true anyway. 

6Oracle adequacy metrics. Hossain and Dwyer catalogue every oracle-based adequacy metric published between 2007 and 2023, and find that all of them share one direction [27]. An element is covered when it is executed and affects a value checked by an oracle through a dependency chain. Schuler and Zeller’s checked coverage is the sharpest of the family [53]. A self-referential oracle scores perfectly on all of them, because the mutated function is in the dynamic slice of the assertion; it influences both sides. The same direction was reached independently two decades earlier in temporal-logic model checking [12, 26] and is current practice in hardware [67, 24]. The one prior provenance restriction we found, interface-aware signal temporal logic, partitions a specification’s signals by interface role, input against output [19], which is a different partition from ours and does not decide killability. 

Vacuity. The closest mechanism-plus-detector analogue outside software testing does not reach our defect. Vacuity detection quantifies over subformulas of the specification and perturbs the specification [8, 4, 40, 23]; coverage in model checking perturbs the system [12, 38]. Our defect, a relation between two quantities both produced by the mutated component, is formally non-vacuous under every definition we retrieved, since replacing either side by false falsifies the formula. The check does not merely miss it; it certifies it healthy. Ball and Kupferman are the nearest miss, and they strengthen the point [5]. They place a real oracle inside the vacuity framework and define vacuity as branch coverage of it. Nothing there forbids that oracle from calling the program to build its expectation, and in that case every branch is still taken and the algorithm reports a clean pass. A paper that put an oracle inside the vacuity framework and did not ask the provenance question is the best evidence available that the question was not being asked. 

Property-based testing, evaluated. Ravi and Coblenz supply the only measured baseline against which our property-only result can be read [49]. Over 40 Python projects, unit tests found 1,365 of 1,610 detected mutations against property tests’ 467. They outkill roughly 3 to 1, and do so in 32 of the 40 projects with 2 ties. The direction is ours. What differs is overlap and efficiency. About 15% of mutations were caught by both styles, where ours nearly coincide. Property tests won outright in 6 projects, where ours never do. Per test they are roughly 50 times as effective, the one axis on which our suites behave like theirs. Their input sweep is the strongest evidence against a "just run it more" remedy: 96% of the mutations they found came within 350 inputs. Goldstein et al. interview practitioners, 7 of 30 of whom name mutation testing as their check on whether a property is real, just below example inspection at 8 [25]. Hughes’s industrial QuickCheck experience is the best-known report that property testing finds what conventional testing misses, though it is an experience report rather than a controlled evaluation [28]. It also comes from a style we do not use. It maintains an abstract model with state transitions per API operation, which is an independent source of expected values and is therefore structurally incapable of self-reference. Coverage-guided property testing addresses the complementary problem of generator reach [41]. Property-based testing descends from QuickCheck [13] and metamorphic testing from Chen et al. [11, 54]; both appear in our suites. 

Falsification oracles for cyber-physical systems. Signal temporal logic is specification-anchored in its semantics and state-anchored in its practice. The robustness of an atomic proposition is the distance from the signal to a set fixed by the formula [1], so anything state-7anchored enters through what people put inside that set. ST-Lib is the field’s catalogue of what a requirement looks like, and its named templates compare a signal against a second signal or against the signal’s own earlier value. Its authors state our risk condition in their own words, that the expected steady-state value of the signal may be unknown when the specification is created [37]. Requirement mining is the canonical case of a threshold obtained from the system’s own realized behavior [36]. The predicate fires, unremarked, in the community’s canonical benchmark. The ARCH-COMP air-fuel control requirements bound a normalized quantity computed inside the model under test [3, 45]. Breach ships the same model, with its requirement written against a reference signal rather than against that normalized quantity [15]. We state that as a structural finding and a hypothesis, not a measured detection loss, since we ran no mutation testing there. Two sources bound it: Li et al. read realized positions safely because plant and system under test are separate artifacts [42], which in our simulator they are not; and Shin records that mutation-based adequacy assessment for a whole simulated system does not yet exist [55]. HECATE is the closest analogue to our test files [20]. 

Mutation analysis of simulated and safety-relevant systems. Mutation analysis with simula-tion subjects exists: Bartocci et al. run it on an aircraft elevator control system [7], and Cornejo et al. at 212,502-mutant scale on satellite software tested through emulators [14, 64]. The air-traffic gap is real but thin, with one near neighbor: Boukelloul et al. mutate agent coordination in an en-route air traffic control model, with oracles anchored on published separation minima, and perform no oracle analysis [10]. Because the domain is thin, we rest no novelty claim on the subject. 

Fault propagation, and the explanation we rejected. Voas’s model states that a fault is revealed only if it is executed, if it infects program state, and if that infection propagates to an observable output [66]. The distance an infection must travel to reach an oracle is the natural explanatory variable to draw from that model, and it was ours until the scope experiment separated it from anchoring. Section 10 sets out why we rejected it, and records that the quantity is in any case already operationalized by others [46, 63, 31]. Mutation analysis itself originates with DeMillo et al. [17] and is surveyed by Jia and Harman [35]. Sargent’s framework places this work as computerized model verification [52]. 

# 3 The system and its invariant suites 

SECTOR is a deployed air traffic control simulator written in TypeScript. Its users include a retired area controller who serves as the project’s domain reviewer, and the two defects described in Sec-tion 1 were both observed in live sessions; neither surfaced in testing. The subsystem relevant here is a deterministic core containing the flight model, the command queue, the route and approach controllers, conflict detection, and collision-avoidance logic. The core is free of browser depen-dencies and uses a seeded pseudorandom generator, so a scenario is reproducible from a seed. It is 17,688 lines across 60 files, within a 52,000-line application, and it is under continuous change: 29 commits landed on it in the month during which the holding suite of Section 5 ran green on every one of them. The 4 modules we mutate are a small slice of it, chosen for their structure; size was not a criterion. Every count in this section is as of the commit the study ran against; the codebase has moved since. 8The pre-existing hand-written tests are not a token baseline. The unit suite is 248 files and 3,819 tests, and it runs on every commit alongside a typechecking gate. Every property-only count in this paper is measured against that suite. Section 5 reports that the property suites add little, and this is what they add little to. Twelve model-free invariant suites cover temporal behaviors in this core. They contain 47 tests, of which 44 are generated properties written with fast-check , and a full run executes 9,870 traces in about 1.4 seconds. Two rules define their construction. First, every oracle is either an invariant computed from the input trace together with a named specification constant imported from the source, or a metamorphic relation between two executions of the real code. None of the 12 maintains a reference model. One file elsewhere in the tree does, a model-conformance proof-of-concept for the debounce that predates the methodology, and Section 7 runs it as a control. The reasoning was that a reference model is a second implementation that drifts as the real code changes and can carry the same fault as the code it judges. That reasoning is sound, and Section 6 argues that it also removes the only independent source of expected values, which is the condition under which the defect we report becomes natural to write. Second, because safety invariants are one-directional, and are satisfied by code that does too little as readily as by code that is correct, every suite is required to carry at least one oracle of the liveness, exactly-once, additivity or determinism kind. In the motivating debounce defect the natural safety bound, that eligibility is never held longer than the specified window, did not dis-criminate, because the aircraft released eligibility too early. The suites are not a continuous integration gate. They run as part of the ordinary pre-commit test invocation and are treated as reference artifacts to be re-derived when the behavior they de-scribe is touched. 

Where the constants come from. The argument in Section 6 turns on specification anchoring having been available and free, so it matters which of the quantities this paper prints are published and which are ours. Three are published. The holding turn is constructed at the lesser of Rate One (3 deg/s) or a fixed bank angle, which is the construction given by the International Civil Aviation Organization in its Doc 8168 (PANS-OPS) [56] and by the US Federal Aviation Administration in its Aeronautical Information Manual (AIM) 5-3-8j, the latter directing that all turns be made at “3 degrees per second, or 30 degree bank angle, or 25 degree bank angle, provided a flight director system is used”, whichever requires the least bank [18]. The maximum holding indicated airspeeds by altitude band (200, 230 and 265 kt), and the 6,000 and 14,000 foot breaks between those bands, are AIM 5-3-8j as well [18]. Those bands are the FAA’s: ICAO publishes different ones, so this is a US convention applied uniformly across our airports. The vertical separation minima are ICAO Doc 4444 (PANS-ATM): 1,000 ft below flight level (FL) 290, 1,000 ft between FL 290 and FL 410 inclusive where the reduced vertical separation minimum (RVSM) is in force, and 2,000 ft above FL 410 [30]. Our implementation is that rule, which is why its constant is named for the RVSM ceiling rather than for FL 290. Three others that this paper prints are modeling choices, and we mark them as such instead of letting them sit undifferentiated beside the published values. The density model estimateTAS is ours. So is the four-second eligibility hold the debounce implements, which was tuned to bridge geometric seams and has no external referent. And so, importantly, is the two-nautical-mile hori-zontal trigger for a resolution advisory: a real traffic alert and collision avoidance system (TCAS) 9How one number is produced 

one mutant population, held fixed seed pinned, test count unchanged run before run after 

> one change

difference of the two kill sets, taken by mutant identity 

recovered : survived before, killed after 

cost : killed before, survived after  

> What we change, three times Remove anchoring from a blind oracle

12 of 46 21 of 46 +9detection rises  

> Insert it into a sound oracle

18 of 19 14 of 19 −4detection falls, so the first result is not an artifact of having repaired something 

> Change neither , move only the scope

39 of 121 42 of 121 +3the same repair is inert in the narrow target, so anchoring is scope-relative 

Figure 3: The measurement, and the three interventions built on it. No number here is a score on its own. Each is the difference between two runs over one fixed population with the seed pinned and the test count unchanged, taken by mutant identity rather than by subtracting scores, because two runs can kill the same number of mutants and kill different ones. Each intervention changes exactly one thing and reports that difference. The holding figures are A0 and A3a of Table 2, so the 9 is what closing every anchoring channel on that module recovers; 8 of the 9 come from the single conditioning instance, and Section 7 draws that distinction once. The scope intervention is the S2 pair of Table 5. II triggers on projected time to closest approach with a horizontal threshold that varies by sensitiv-ity level, not on a fixed range test, so the flat 2 NM used here is a simplification. It is adequate for the behavior under study, which concerns what an advisory does once triggered; the fidelity of the trigger is out of scope. It is not a standard, and nothing in this paper should be read as claiming it is. 

# 4 Study design 

We selected four targets spanning the range of structural relationships between an oracle and the code it judges. • Holding geometry. A 90-line module computing holding turn rate, turn radius, target speed and outbound leg time, drawn to scale in Figure 1. Covered indirectly by two suites, one over the holding state machine and one over the flown trajectory. This is the paper’s central instance and the one Figure 2 anatomizes. • Debounce. Lines 97 to 118 of the route-following controller, the eligibility hold that mo-tivated the methodology. The signal it steadies is approach eligibility, a geometric test that can go false for an instant without anything having changed, and the hold releases after four seconds. The covering property suite asserts a bound on the hold duration, a no-resurrection property, a time-step additivity relation, and determinism. 10 • Angle and frame arithmetic. A 61-line module of pure functions for angle normalization, shortest angular delta, bearing, magnetic and true frame conversion, and planar distance. Twelve metamorphic properties cover it directly. • Collision-avoidance controller. A 309-line module for resolution advisory triggering, sense resolution and phase management. Covered by a suite asserting that every controller com-mand is rejected while an advisory is active and that the active phase persists for a minimum duration. A fifth target enters later and only for the scope experiment of Section 7.5: the minimum safe altitude warning (MSAW) block inside the physics loop, together with the vertical-speed com-putation in the same file. It takes no part in the comparison of Section 5, because there is no hand-written example suite over that block to compare against, and reporting it in Table 1 would mean inventing a baseline. It is used for what it is uniquely suited to, which is varying the mutate scope under a fixed oracle. For each of the four comparison targets we performed two mutation testing runs with Stryker, using the vitest runner, per-test coverage analysis, a concurrency of 6, and a 30-second timeout. The first run executed only the invariant properties covering the target. The second executed only the hand-written example tests covering it, excluding property tests. Restricting the test set per run is what makes the comparison possible: a run over the whole suite measures the project, not the style. 

The partition is derived from coverage, not from imports. Our first attempt assigned test files to the two categories by reading their imports. That specification is wrong, and it is the single largest error we made in this study. The hand-written example suite for the debounce never im-ports the route-following controller; it drives the debounce through the physics update. Imports are syntactic; coverage is empirical. The partition reported here is derived from Stryker’s own cov-eredBy : each target is run once against the whole unit suite, each mutant’s covering test identifiers are mapped back to files, and every file covering at least one mutant enters the partition. Under the import rule the debounce example suite appeared to score 21.05% with no coverage at all on two branches; under the coverage rule it scores 89.47%, and the "no coverage" finding was an artifact of the partition. We report the corrected figures throughout. It is also the reason this paper makes no complementarity claim: under the import rule the two styles looked complementary, and under the coverage rule they very nearly coincide. One hand rule survives on top of the derived partition and we state it here. Files match-ing *.property.test.ts are excluded from both buckets, because counting a generator-driven model-conformance suite as an example test would credit the hand-written style with property-test detection, and counting it as one of our invariant suites would credit the model-free discipline with a model-based result. Exactly one file falls in that bucket, and instead of letting its exclusion stand as an undisclosed convenience we run it separately in Section 7 against the same mutant population. 

The mutate scope is a parameter, and the debounce differs from the others. Three of the four targets mutate a whole file. The debounce mutates lines 97 to 118 of a 604-line file, which matters because the constant its oracles assert against sits at line 37 of that same file: widen the scope to 11 the whole file and those oracles would become state-anchored by our own definition. Two things bound this. The predicate is decidable relative to a declared mutate scope, not absolutely, and we say so wherever it is stated. And the range was not drawn to produce the result: the debounce runs are timestamped more than 8 hours before the first ablation run and nearly 10 before the negative control, so the scope predates the anchoring thesis rather than following from it. A reader with no mutant population has no mutate target either, and Section 11 says what the predicate reduces to in that case. 

Mutant identity and denominators. Every number this paper reports is a difference between two runs taken on this basis, which Figure 3 draws. Mutants are matched across runs on the tuple (start line, start column, mutator name, replacement text). That tuple is not unique: a few mutants share it, and where they do their statuses can disagree, so collapsing them with a last-write-wins map yields an order-dependent answer. We report raw and distinct counts separately and resolve conflicts under an explicit rule, any-killed , meaning an identity counts as detected if any raw mutant carrying that key was killed, which is the semantically correct rule for the question "does this suite detect this change." The alternative rule is computed alongside it, and the difference is confined to how many mutants are credited to both suites at once: 3 on the collision module and, in the scope experiment of Section 7.5, one and two. No property-only column in this paper moves under either rule , which matters because those columns are what every conclusion here is drawn from. We assert both rules in the validation program instead of reporting the one that reads better. Scores use Stryker’s documented default denominator, (Killed + Timeout )/(Killed + Timeout + Survived +

NoCoverage ), so uncovered mutants are inside the denominator and timeouts count as killed [59]. Scores are over raw mutants; the survivor-diff columns are over distinct identities, which is why the two sets of totals differ slightly on two modules. No retrieved study shares this identity key, and few share the denominator, so Section 9 states both conventions. 

Equivalent mutants. Equivalent mutants, which change no behavior and cannot be killed, inflate the apparent weakness of any suite. We classify by hand and report explicitly instead of adjusting scores. The angle module and the debounce are classified exhaustively, at two and one respectively. The 165 collision mutants surviving both suites are not: they are bounded instead by a 30-mutant sample drawn from a recorded seed, reported in Section 5. The comparable cyber-physical liter-ature strips 17 to 22% of all mutants as equivalent [7], and one such study strips 42% of the live 

mutants [14], so our absolute percentages read low against that convention for two independent reasons, an inflated denominator and an unclassified equivalent fraction. 

Reproducibility. Every quantity in this paper is emitted by one program, which reads the raw Stryker reports and computes scores, diffs, per-function breakdowns and the published dataset. Nine figures we had computed by hand off a terminal were recomputed against it, and the tool was right in every case of disagreement. It also carries a gate asserting every mutation figure printed here against the report it came from, under both conflict rules, and exiting non-zero on any mismatch. We added the gate late: the version it replaced pointed at superseded import-derived reports and at the wrong ablation state, so it agreed with itself while disagreeing with the draft on 5 figures, and it printed a table rather than failing. A reproducibility artifact that cannot fail is the same defect this paper is about, one level up. 12 Module Raw Dist. Prop. Ex. Stacked P-only E-only Neither                                         

> Holding geometry 46 44 12 (26.09%) 35 (76.09%) 35 (76.09%) ∗021 11 Debounce 19 19 18 (94.74%) 17 (89.47%) 18 (94.74%) 101Angle arithmetic 50 50 40 (80.00%) 48 (96.00%) 48 (96.00%) 082Collision avoidance 264 253 54 (20.45%) †90 (34.09%) 92 (34.85%) 235 165
> after the oracle repair of Section 7, reported here so the headline is not computed from it:
> Holding geometry 46 44 21 (45.65%) 35 (76.09%) 36 (78.26%) 113 10

Table 1: Mutants killed, with the score in brackets, for each suite run in isolation and for the two run together (“Stacked”), then mutants killed by exactly one of the two, under a coverage-derived partition. Counts are the numbers the prose quotes. Rows above the rule are the suites as found ;the row below is the same population after Section 7’s re-anchoring, an intervention rather than an observed state. Scores are over raw mutants, diff columns over distinct identities, which is why the totals differ where they differ. ∗The one stacked figure not separately executed: the as-found holding property suite kills a strict subset of the example suite’s kills, so the stack is the example run. †Collision figures are lower bounds: a 30-mutant sample of the 165 both-survivors classifies 6.7% unkillable, Wilson 95% [1.8, 21.3], placing the true property score between roughly 20.5 and 24%. 

Use of AI tools. Claude Opus 5, accessed through the Claude Code command-line tool in August 2026, wrote the analysis program that emits every figure reported here, its validation gate and the reproduction script published with the dataset, and drafted and revised the text of this manuscript under the author’s direction, including two restructurings of its argument. A coding agent wrote the ablation repairs and the state-anchored negative control to specifications the author fixed in advance, which is part of the study design. Claude Opus 4.8 and Claude Opus 5 performed the prior-art retrieval and the adversarial review whose challenges are dispositioned throughout. The mutated modules and the invariant suites under evaluation were authored the same way, which Section 9 treats as a threat rather than a disclosure. The author directed and verified all of it and takes full responsibility for the content; no AI technology is an author. No quantity reported here was produced by a language model: every figure is computed by analyze.ts from the raw reports, and every mutation figure is asserted against them by a gate that exits non-zero on any mismatch. 

# 5 Results 

Table 1 reports the mutation score for each suite run in isolation, for the two run together, and the survivor diff between them. 

The headline is the property-only column, and it is small. Summed across the 4 modules, the property tests covering them kill 3 mutants out of 366 that the pre-existing hand-written tests do not: one, zero, zero and two. We state that number as found rather than as repaired, because the fourth property-only mutant exists only after an intervention this study performed. Re-anchoring the holding oracle in Section 7 raises that module’s property-only count from zero to one and the total from 3 to 4, and every later reference to “4” in this paper carries that condition. The unit measured is the property tests covering these 4 modules, which is not a clean subset of the 13 12 suites: math.ts is shared, so its coverage-derived partition draws tests from 11 of them. No claim here extends to what those suites cover on modules we did not mutate. Two of the 3 non-zero contributions in the repaired total are exact boundary values that a hand-written case did not happen to pin. On the debounce it is the release comparison mutated from >= to >. On holding geometry it is the altitude band boundary, altitudeFt <= 14000 mutated to <, which the property generator reaches because it draws altitudes as thousands and therefore lands on 14,000 exactly. This is the classic argument for generated tests, and it is worth exactly two mutants here. The third non-zero contribution is the pair on collision avoidance, which are not boundary values. 

Stacking the two styles is what a project actually does, and it buys almost nothing. Few projects ship one style, so we ran the union as well, on every module. Against the better of the two halves it recovers zero, zero, zero and two mutants, and one more on holding geometry once that suite is re-anchored. On the angle module the stack is indistinguishable from the example suite alone and on the debounce from the property suite alone. Ravi and Coblenz report the same aggregate direction over 40 Python projects, though with far less overlap than we find [49]. That is worth one methodological remark. Composition is exact. On all 4 modules the union kills precisely the union of what the two suites kill in isolation, to the individual mutant, and the both-survivor counts are identical in every view. Tests share process state and run in an order, so two suites measured apart need not compose when run together; here they do, so every stacked figure above is recoverable from the published dataset without the four extra runs. We executed them instead of deriving them because deriving across the raw and distinct denominators is the error that damaged an earlier pass of this study. 

Per test, the properties are far more efficient, and that matters for how this result should be read. Dividing kills by the number of tests in each partition gives 4.50 against 0.21 on the debounce, 0.93 against 0.03 on the angle module, 1.00 against 0.18 on holding geometry, and 27.00 against 2.57 on collision avoidance, so the property side is between 6 and 33 times as efficient per test. The holding figure is the suite as found; re-anchored it kills 21 rather than 12 over the same 13 tests, which would read 1.62 and 9-fold. The denominator is unflattering to the example side, because a coverage-derived partition sweeps in files that touch the module incidentally, 84 files and 1,708 tests in the angle case, so these ratios are an order of magnitude rather than a measurement. Read with that caveat they still matter: our result is that two styles nearly coincide in what they detect, not that generated properties are a poor use of effort. Ravi and Coblenz report roughly fiftyfold on the same axis [49], so this is the one dimension on which our suites behave like theirs. 

Holding geometry. As found, the property suite killed nothing the example tests did not already kill, at 26.09% against 76.09. That is the result which prompted the rest of this paper. Its 32 distinct survivors are the 21 the example suite kills alone plus the 11 both suites miss, and they divide cleanly: 10 in speed selection, 15 in two functions the harness never calls, 4 in leg timing behind a lap-duration bound carrying several minutes of deliberate slack, 2 in turn radius and 1 in turn rate. The 10 in speed selection are the important group, and the reason they survive is not that no oracle observes their effect. It is that the geometric oracles are conditioned on the aircraft’s realized true airspeed, so a wrong speed produces a correctly shaped racetrack for that wrong speed . Section 6 develops that sentence into the paper’s thesis, and Section 7 shows that 8 14 of the 10 die once the yardstick is re-anchored. It is worth saying explicitly what anchoring does not explain here, because the repair nearly doubles the score and that invites over-attribution. Anchoring owns 9 of the 32 survivors. The largest single group, the 15 in two functions the harness never calls, is a generator and harness limitation with no oracle content whatever, and is the production-side blind spot Vera-Pérez et al. measure as pseudo-tested methods [62], and it is also why this module is the one most sensitive to the denominator convention: excluding uncovered mutants moves the as-found figure from 26.09 to 41.38%. The repair nearly doubles the score under either convention, 26.09 to 45.65 or 41.38 to 72.41, but the mechanism this paper is about accounts for 9 mutants; it does not account for the whole distance between the two suites. 

Debounce. The property suite kills 18 of 19 and the example suite 17 of 19, and the properties are very nearly a subset rather than a superset. The single property-only kill is the release boundary described above. The single mutant surviving both negates a guard whose false branch is unreach-able given a call-site invariant documented on the method, and is equivalent. This module is the reference case for a healthy oracle, and Section 7 uses it as such: its assertions compare against a constant imported from outside the mutated line range, which no mutation in the population can perturb. 

Angle arithmetic. The example suite kills 48 of 50, and the two survivors are the two we argue are equivalent: a comparison whose alternative branch is absorbed by a downstream guard, and an addition of 180 degrees mutated to a subtraction, which normalizes identically. The example suite therefore kills every killable mutant in the module, and there was no headroom for the property suite to contribute. That zero is a ceiling effect rather than a weakness in the properties, and it is the clearest illustration of why a property-only count must be read against the population it is computed over. 

Collision avoidance. Both suites are weak and 165 of 253 distinct mutants survive both, so every collision figure in this paper is a bound: 30 of those 165 were sampled for equivalence and 135 remain individually unclassified. The surviving population is concentrated where the advisory’s content is decided rather than where its contract is: 56 in sense resolution and direction scoring, 37 in the update and trigger path, and 21 in parallel-approach detection. The property suite is sound for what it claims, which is the advisory’s contract with the controller while active, namely that every controller command is rejected for as long as an advisory runs and that the phase persists for its minimum duration. It claims nothing about whether an advisory should have fired at all, or which aircraft is sent which way. A sense is the direction of a resolution advisory, climb or descend. Coordinated opposite senses is the defining property of the collision-avoidance concept, and no oracle in either suite constrains it. That is a gap in the suite and not a fact about property testing, and it is the one module where we would expect a competent second author to do materially better. Because 165 unclassified survivors invite the worst available reading, we sampled 30 of them from a recorded seed and argued each individually: 2 are behaviorally inert and 28 are genuine undetected behavior changes, an unkillable proportion of 6.7% with a Wilson 95% interval of [1.8, 21.3] that puts the true property score between roughly 20.5 and 24%. The bound supports the 15 conclusion the raw number suggests: this module genuinely is close to untested by both suites, and saying so with an interval is both more accurate and more defensible than a point estimate. One reading it does not support is that the module is close to broken. A surviving mutant establishes only that no oracle in either suite pins the behavior that mutant changes, and every figure in this paper measures oracles and not the correctness of the code they run against. The classification pass is worth reporting in one further respect, because it repeated an error the rest of this paper is about. A first pass put 4 of the 30 in a separate class, differing from the original only at an exact value that a continuous scenario space would not produce, and counted them as unkillable at 20.0%. That premise was wrong for this harness. Our scenarios do not integrate positions from continuous inputs; the covering tests assign them directly at round numbers, so an above-ground-level test is an integer difference and a two-nautical-mile range is hypot(2.0, 0) 

exactly. The fourth was settled by reading the closest-approach routine, where the time to closest approach is clamped by a max(0, ...) and is therefore exactly zero for every already-diverging pair, so the value never sits at a knife edge. The tell was available in our own results, since the single property-only mutant this study reports on holding geometry is itself an exact boundary hit. Rather than reclassify on that reasoning alone we wrote the 4 killing tests, each constructing the exact value and carrying an intermediate assertion showing it is genuinely produced. All 4 pass against clean source, and run as the sole test set all 4 mutants die, so these are gaps established by execution. The tests were then discarded rather than adopted, because keeping them would close 4 real gaps at the cost of changing every collision figure reported here; that is a decision for after the measurement rather than during it. Note the direction of the whole correction: it tightened the interval and made this module look worse. 

# 6 Oracle anchoring 

The four measurements are not contradictory once one asks where each oracle obtains the value it compares against, which is the anchoring defined in Section 1. We restate the distinction here because the rest of this section is the argument that it is the operative one. 

Specification-anchored: the expected value is composed in the test from constants, published procedures or specification values fixed outside the mutate target. 

State-anchored: the expected value is obtained, directly or transitively, from the run-ning system under test. Of the four channels, only the expected value is named in the prior literature. The width of a tolerance band, a conditioning variable read at evaluation time and a scenario-placing generator are not, and the conditioning variable turns out to carry most of the cost. 

The mechanism, stated as a cancellation. Figure 4 gives the shape and the algebra follows. Let an oracle assert |m − e| ≤ τ, or equivalently m/e ∈ [1 − ε, 1 + ε], where m is a measurement taken from a run and e is the expectation. Suppose e is obtained by calling the module under mutation, or is a function of a state variable that module produces, and suppose a mutation scales the underlying quantity by a factor k. If the measurement is also proportional to that quantity, then the mutant run yields m′ = km and e′ = ke , so m′/e′ = m/e exactly. The comparison is invariant 16 State-anchored                

> a fault scales both sides by k
> mutate target realized state measurement mexpectation e
> |m−e| ≤ τ
> passes for every input
> ×k
> ×k×k
> Specification-anchored
> only the measurement moves mutate target realized state specification constants measurement mexpectation e
> |m−e| ≤ τ
> can fail
> ×k
> unreachable

Figure 4: Why a state-anchored oracle cannot fail. On the left the expectation is obtained from state the mutate target produces, so a fault scaling that state by k scales measurement and expectation alike and the comparison is invariant. On the right the expectation is composed from values the target cannot reach, so the same fault moves one side only. under the mutation. The property does not merely fail to fail on the inputs that were generated; it cannot fail on any input, because the defect lies in the oracle rather than in the input space. No quantity of generated traces can reveal it, and this is why the suite in question had run green on every commit for a month. This is the sense in which our second motivating defect and our measurement are the same phenomenon seen twice. The pattern is that a property is blind to any fault whose effect is absorbed into the state its oracle conditions on. In Voas’s terms the infection occurs but does not propagate to the observation point, because the observation point is defined relative to state the infection has already altered. Conditioning an oracle on realized state is much of what makes an emergent-behavior property readable and stable, and it is also what can destroy its sensitivity to faults upstream of that state. 

The sizing condition, which is what makes this predictive. A claim that self-reference costs detection would be false 3 times out of 6 in our own data, and we report the measurement that establishes that in Section 7. The narrower claim the data support is: Self-reference costs detection when the anchored value sizes the comparison the oracle makes and the fault moves it proportionally , so that measured and expected cancel. Where the anchored value only places a scenario, feeds a bound carrying large slack, or measures a quantity another suite covers directly, the self-reference is latent :real, statically identifiable, and free. The debounce negative control sharpens this further, and the refinement was predicted before it was measured. In that suite the comparison-operator mutants keep dying even after the oracle is state-anchored, because the test restates that comparison against a constant the mutation cannot reach. Faults that move the anchored quantity cancel; faults that change a comparison the test independently restates do not. 17 Model-freedom is the risk condition. The strongest property-testing results on stateful behavior in the literature are model-based [28], and an abstract model is an independent source of expected values, so that style is structurally incapable of the defect. We were explicitly model-free, and model-freedom is precisely the absence of an independent source of expected values, so the author reaches for the running system. The trap was not that specification anchoring was unavailable. Air traffic control publishes its procedural specification, and several of the values we needed already sat in the configuration module as named constants. State anchoring was simply the more natural thing to write, and Section 7 measures how often it was written. 

The scope condition. State anchoring cancels only when the source of the observed state lies in-side the mutate target. Reading realized positions and speeds from a simulator to judge an autopilot is safe, because the plant and the system under test are separate artifacts [42]. In our simulator they coincide by construction: the integrator that produces the trajectory is the code being mutated. This is a scope condition rather than a caveat, and stating it is what makes the claim falsifiable in the right place. 

# 7 Measuring the mechanism 

## 7.1 Re-anchoring recovers 8 mutants 

The holding suite’s two containment properties assert that the steady-state racetrack width stays within a tolerance band of twice the aircraft’s turn radius. The band is two-sided on purpose. A pattern wider than the band leaves the protected airspace the hold is meant to stay inside, a pattern narrower than it never opens out to that airspace at all, and both must fail. That form is required by our own methodology. The expected width, however, was computed by calling the turn-radius function exported by the module under test, evaluated at the aircraft’s realized true airspeed. Figure 1 drew the consequence to scale, and is the one piece of domain background the rest of this section assumes; it is worth turning back to. We closed the anchoring channels one at a time against a fixed 46-mutant population, with seeds pinned throughout so every figure is deterministic rather than sampled. Table 2 reports the result. 

Two recovery counts, and which is which. Two counts run through the rest of this paper and they are not interchangeable. Closing every anchoring channel on this module recovers 9 mutants, taking A0’s 12 to A3a’s 21, and that is the doubling of the score from 26.09 to 45.65%. Closing the single conditioning instance recovers 8 on its own, taking A1’s 13 to A3a’s 21. Three things in that table matter more than the headline score. 1. A3a adds no assertion. It removes exactly one value flow, the realized true airspeed feeding the containment yardstick, and recovers 8 mutants on its own, so the blind spot was caused by the conditioning and not by a missing test. This is the provenance the test-smell rule legislates over [51], moved and nothing else. Figure 1 draws why: anchored on realized speed, a speed-table mutation moves the expected racetrack width along with the flown one; anchored on the specification’s speed for the altitude it does not. 18 // BEFORE. Both the yardstick and its speed come from the code under test.  

> import { holdTurnRadiusNM, holdOutboundLegSec } from ’@/core/holdGeometry.ts’; twoR: 2 * holdTurnRadiusNM(ac.trueAirspeedKt), // <- realized state
> legTimeSec: holdOutboundLegSec(ac.position.z),
> // H4, unchanged by the repair:
> expect(maxXte).toBeLessThanOrEqual(1.06 * run.twoR); expect(maxXte).toBeGreaterThanOrEqual(0.94 * run.twoR);
> // AFTER. The yardstick is composed in the test from the published constants, // and the speed is the specification’s speed for the altitude, not the // aircraft’s realized speed. No assertion is added and no source is changed.
> import { specTurnRadiusNM, specHoldTasKt, specOutboundLegSec } from ’./holdSpecGeometry.ts’; twoR: 2 * specTurnRadiusNM(specHoldTasKt(s.iasKt, s.altFt)), legTimeSec: specOutboundLegSec(ac.position.z),
> // holdSpecGeometry.ts, which deliberately does NOT import holdGeometry.ts:
> export function specTurnRadiusNM(tasKts: number): number { const bankRad = (SIMULATION.HOLD_MAX_BANK_DEG * Math.PI) / 180; const bankLimitedDegPerSec = (G_BANK_FACTOR * Math.tan(bankRad)) / tasKts; const rateDegPerSec = Math.min( SIMULATION.HOLD_TURN_RATE_DEGS_PER_SEC, bankLimitedDegPerSec); return (tasKts * KNOTS_TO_NM_PER_SEC) / ((rateDegPerSec * Math.PI) / 180); }

Figure 5: The containment yardstick before and after re-anchoring. The repair changes where the expected value comes from and nothing else: the same two assertions, the same tolerance band, the same generator, the same pinned seed, the same 46 mutants. It recovers 9 mutants, 8 of them from the yardstick alone. 2. The two remedies are redundant rather than additive. That is what one expects if a single mechanism is responsible, and it is not what one expects if the suite simply had two unrelated gaps. 3. The first reading of this ablation concluded the opposite. An earlier analysis argued that the third channel was not a self-reference closure at all, on the grounds that the new oracle adds an assertion rather than removing a value flow, and concluded that self-reference was nearly costless at one mutant. The A3a run refutes that, and we report the sequence because it is the same species of error the rest of the paper is about: a plausible argument that was not checked against a measurement it could have been checked against. 

The 1-against-8 framing is not the right comparison, and we do not make it. It is tempting to read the ablation as saying that the channel the literature has named costs one mutant while the channel it has never named costs 8. That ratio is partly an artifact of mutant density. The 8 occupy 3 source lines, and 6 of them sit on a single nested ternary expressing one symptom, a wrong com-manded hold speed; the ternary admits 4 ConditionalExpression and 4 EqualityOperator 

mutants where the first channel’s site, a Math.min call, admits exactly one replacement. We ran the subsumption analysis rather than estimating it, and the answer is worse than the estimate we had made. Re-running the population with bail disabled yields a full kill matrix, and all 8 recovered mutants share an identical killer set, the same 3 tests, so under dynamic subsumption 19 Run Channels closed Killed Score P-only                         

> A0 as found 12 26.09% 0A1 expected value recomposed 13 28.26% 0A2 plus generator recomposed 13 28.26% 0A3a plus yardstick re-anchored on specification 21 45.65% 1A3b A1 plus a new speed-bound oracle 21 45.65% 1A5 every closure plus the new oracle 21 45.65% 1

Table 2: Ablation over a fixed population of 46 mutants on the holding-geometry module. A3a adds no assertion; it changes only where the expected value comes from. A3b changes no existing oracle; it adds one. The two recover the identical 8 mutants and applying both together adds nothing. they form a single class. They are one symptom counted eight ways. The negative control of Section 7.2 behaves the same way: the 4 mutants state anchoring costs fall into 2 classes, of which one subsumes the other. Two caveats travel with that. The relation is dynamic and therefore relative to the suite that computed it, and over 13 tests it is coarse, so two mutants share a killer set because this suite cannot separate them rather than because they are one fault; the survey says plainly that the true disjoint set is not computable and only an approximation is available [47]. And the analysis needs bail disabled, which the runs behind every other figure in this paper did not use, so it is a separate measurement over the same two populations rather than a re-reading of the published ones. The comparison that does not depend on how many mutants a line admits is the property-only column. Closing the named channel moved it by 0, because the example suite already killed that mutant. Closing the unnamed one moved it from 0 to 1, and that mutant is the 14,000 foot band boundary, the only property-only mutant anywhere on this module. 0 against 1 is a weaker-sounding claim than 1 against 8, and it is the one the measurement supports. 

## 7.2 State-anchoring a healthy oracle costs 4 mutants 

The removal alone is a repair, and a repair is consistent with several explanations. The converse experiment is what makes the mechanism an intervention. The debounce property suite is the reference specification-anchored case at 18 of 19, its assertions comparing against ELIGIBILITY_-HOLD_SEC , imported from outside the mutated range and therefore unperturbable by any mutant in the population. We deliberately state-anchored it, replacing the streak the test recomputes from its own input trace with the controller’s own accumulated timer read from the object under test. This is a design a reviewer would wave through, since recomputing in the test what the object already tracks looks redundant, and that plausibility is the point. No production source was changed and no assertion was removed. Detection fell from 18 of 19 to 14 of 19, from 94.74 to 73.68%. Because two records of this prediction exist and they differ, its provenance is worth stating precisely. Two predictions exist and they differ. The first was written into the measurement plan before 20 // BEFORE (specification-anchored). The test accumulates the streak itself from // the trace it generated, and compares against an imported constant.  

> let ineligibleStreak = 0; for (const step of steps) { /* ... */ ineligibleStreak += step.dt; /* ... */ } expect(ineligibleStreak).toBeLessThan(HOLD_SEC); // HOLD_SEC from :37 // AFTER (state-anchored). The oracle reads the accumulator the controller // maintains, which is inside the mutate range. A missing entry reads as // Infinity, because a released hold correctly deletes its map entry.
> const held = controller.eligibilityHold.get(ac.id); expect(held?.ineligibleSec ?? Infinity).toBeLessThan(HOLD_SEC);

Figure 6: The debounce negative control. Detection falls because the oracle now reads the value the mutation perturbs. The direction was predicted in advance; which mutants would survive was predicted only in part, as the text sets out. the state-anchored oracle was written, and named lines 112 and 113, the accumulator and the expiry comparison. The second was recorded after the oracle was written but before it was run, and refined the first by predicting that the comparison-operator mutants at 113 would keep dying, because the test’s own comparison is against a constant outside the mutate range that no mutation can move. Against the outcome, the record is this. Four mutants stopped dying: the accumulator at 112, one branch-forcing mutant at 113, and two at 108 in the external-clear guard. The accumulator was predicted. The refinement about the comparison operators was correct and is the sharpest available statement of the sizing condition, since it distinguishes faults that move the anchored quantity from faults that change a comparison the test independently restates. But the first prediction was wrong about 113 in its unrefined form, and the pair at 108, half the effect, appears in neither prediction. We therefore claim that the direction and magnitude were predicted and that 2 of the 4 surviving mutants were named, not that the prediction held mutant for mutant. The state-anchored suite was then discarded; the working tree keeps the specification-anchored version. Removing state anchoring recovers 8 mutants on holding geometry; introducing it costs 4 on the debounce. 

## 7.3 A reference model kills what specification anchoring kills 

Our argument that model-freedom is the risk condition rested on a structural claim plus one external citation, which is thin for a claim that carries this much of the paper. The model-conformance file of Section 3, the one the *.property.test.ts rule excludes, is the within-system control we had not run: it maintains a reference model of the debounce state machine, asserts that the real controller matches it step for step over the same 19-mutant population, and is the design our argument holds to be structurally incapable of the anchoring defect. Run against that population it kills 18 of 19, and the diff against the specification-anchored invariant suite is empty in both directions: the same 18 mutants die, the same one survives, and that survivor is the guard we argue is equivalent. Table 3 reads the three designs over that one fixed population: This sharpens the claim. A reference model does not detect more here than a property suite with no model at all, provided the property suite anchors its expectations outside the mutate target. 21 Design Expectation comes from Killed Score          

> Reference-model conformance an independent model 18 / 19 94.74% Specification-anchored properties imported constants 18 / 19 94.74% State-anchored properties the object under test 14 / 19 73.68%

Table 3: The same 19 mutants judged by 3 oracle designs. The model-based and specification-anchored designs are indistinguishable, killing the identical set; only state anchoring loses mutants.               

> Instance Channel Recovery
> Yardstick from the turn-radius function expected value +1 Generator from the turn-radius function scenario placement +0 Yardstick from realized true airspeed conditioning, sizes the band +8
> Leg time from the outbound-leg function expected value, bound with slack +0 Angle measurement from the shared math module measurement, covered elsewhere +0 MSAW alert against realized vertical speed conditioning, is the expectation +3

Table 4: Six state-anchored instances ablated against fixed mutant populations. The two that satisfy the sizing condition carry 11 of the 12 recovered mutants; the other 4 carry one between them. The prevalence figure should not be reported without this split. The last row’s recovery is conditional on the mutate scope and is the subject of Section 7.5. Read against the oracle-assessment literature, which scores an oracle by the faults it fails to reveal [31, 33], the two designs are indistinguishable on this population. What separates the designs is not whether a model is present but where the expectation comes from, which is the paper’s thesis measured on one module instead of argued from the literature. It also narrows our own advice: the reason to prefer a model is maintainability or expressiveness, not fault detection, and the reason to fear model-freedom is that it removes the obvious independent source of expectations and leaves the running system as the nearest substitute. We report two caveats. This is one module and the smallest population in the study, and the model suite achieves its result with 2 tests against the invariant suite’s 4, so the comparison is of designs rather than of effort. 

## 7.4 Prevalence, and why the cost figure must travel with it 

A static pass over all 12 invariant suites, asking whether each obtains a value from a module under mutation and uses it as an expected value, as a conditioning variable read at evaluation time, or as a generator, found 6 instances in 3 suites. Two were previously unknown. All 6 have now been ablated against fixed populations, and the result is the reason the sizing condition exists. Six instances found in 3 of 12 suites means the defect is not idiosyncratic, and that the claim about state anchoring being the more natural thing to write is measured rather than argued. 2 of 6 carrying almost the whole cost means the prevalence figure would badly overstate the mechanism if it travelled alone; the honest summary is 6 found, 6 measured, 2 costly. The split is not arbitrary: the two costly instances are exactly the two where the anchored value sizes the comparison the 22 oracle makes, and they carry 11 of the 12 mutants the ablations recover. The count of 6 is still a floor, because channels reached through an import are found reliably while judging whether a value is realized state required reading each oracle, which is judgment rather than analysis. 

## 7.5 Scope relativity, measured 

The sixth instance in Table 4 is the one whose anchoring is decided by the mutate scope rather than by the oracle text. The paper has so far asserted that scope relativity on one citation [42]. This measures it. The MSAW suite asserts that a terrain alert reflects the aircraft’s current vertical direction, against a terrain service wired to be unsafe exactly while descending: 

> expect(ac.msawAlert).toBe(ac.verticalSpeed < 0);

Both sides read ac.verticalSpeed . The terrain service returns currentSafe = predict-edSafe = (vs >= 0) and the physics block turns that into the alert; the expectation is the same variable read at evaluation time. The anchored value is not merely one input to the comparison, it 

is the expected value, so the sizing condition is satisfied as sharply as it can be. What makes the instance decisive is that ac.verticalSpeed is produced by updateAltitude 

at lines 856 to 925, while the MSAW block the suite exists to test is lines 768 to 799. Same file, different regions. So we ran the identical oracle against two declared scopes, changing nothing else:                

> Cell Mutate scope Anchor in scope State-anchored Spec-anchored Recovery
> S1 768–799 no 21 / 57 (36.84%) 21 / 57 (36.84%) 0S2 768–799, 856–925 yes 39 / 121 (32.23%) 42 / 121 (34.71%) +3

Table 5: One oracle, two declared mutate scopes. Re-anchoring is inert when the value’s producer lies outside the target and recovers 3 mutants when it lies inside. Scores across cells are not comparable, since S2’s population contains S1’s; only the within-cell recovery is. In S1 the diff is empty in both directions: the same 21 mutants die. In S2 3 mutants are recovered, and the location of all 3 is the result. Not one is in the MSAW block. They are a branch inversion at 866 that sends a commanded climb down the descent path, and two rate computations at 910 and 911 that drive the aircraft to its target inside the trace so that it levels off and the vertical speed goes to zero. In each case the state-anchored oracle recomputes its expectation from the vertical speed the mutation has just moved, and agrees with itself. The MSAW block’s own 21 killed and 28 survived are identical under both anchorings. 

Re-anchoring bought detection only against faults in the code that produces the anchored value, and none against faults in the code the oracle was written to test. That measures the scope condition instead of merely stating it: an oracle is not state-anchored in the abstract, it is state-anchored with respect to a declared target. We recorded 4 predictions before writing the re-anchored oracle. The first, that S1 recovery would be zero, held more strongly than stated, since the diff is empty rather than merely equal in count. The second, that S2 recovery would be positive, held in direction and magnitude and was wrong about location: we named the vertical-speed assignments, and the mutants that moved were 23 the branch selector and the two rate computations feeding them. The third, that anchoring would not disturb the MSAW block, held exactly. We report the missed addresses because the mechanism and the addresses are separate claims and only one was predicted. 

## 7.6 The published rule would revert the repair 

Our repair composes the expected value in the test from specification constants, in a helper that deliberately does not import the module under mutation and that duplicates the regulatory speed literals instead of importing the function that serves them. That helper is emphatically a value 

computed during the test , which is precisely what the published detector forbids: the expected value should be a constant or a reference to a constant and not computed during the test [51], and the catalogue entries On The Fly and Second Guess The Calculation say the same [57]. Applying the published smell rule to our repaired suite would flag the entire helper and revert the fix that recovered 8 of 9 mutants. The honest framing is not that the published rule is wrong. It uses "computed in the test" as a proxy for "duplicates production logic", which is a real maintainability cost that our helper does incur: if the specification changes, two places change. The rule optimizes maintainability and, taken literally, degrades fault detection. Nobody had measured that exchange rate. On this module it is 9 mutants of 46. This is also why we state the predicate as provenance rather than as computedness. What determines killability is not whether the expected value was computed during the test but whether it flows from the module under mutation, so a value composed in the test from constants fixed outside the mutate target is unperturbable and safe, which is exactly the case the published rule rejects. 

# 8 Writing the missing oracle, and what it caught 

Everything above is retrospective. Section 5 reported that collision avoidance is close to untested by both suites, that its survivors concentrate where the advisory’s content is decided, and that coordinated opposite senses, the defining property of the concept, is constrained by no oracle in either suite. It also said this is the one module where a competent second author would do materially better. That is a prediction about where a defect would be found if anyone looked, and it can be tested, so we looked. 

The oracle found a live defect. A property was added asserting that the two aircraft of a coor-dinated advisory receive opposite senses and that each is commanded in the sense it was given. It failed against the deployed code. resolveDirections does return an opposite pair in every branch, but a later step overrode the sense to climb for any aircraft on final approach, one aircraft at a time and with no knowledge of its partner. A pair that were both on approach were therefore both commanded to climb, and since each climbed by the same fixed offset the advisory preserved the vertical gap it had fired on exactly. The override was unreachable in every other case, because the same aircraft already outranked its partner in sense selection; it changed the outcome only in the case where it destroyed coordination. 24 Two geometries reach it. Two aircraft compressing on one final need an unrealistic overtake, but two aircraft on final to different airports 1.4 NM and 300 ft apart is ordinary terminal geometry, and the parallel-approach exemption does not cover it because that exemption is keyed on the airport. 

The instrumentation could not have seen it. The event stream and the log both reported the senses resolveDirections returned, which are opposite by construction, in place of the senses applied. Across 147 recorded activations the telemetry showed complementary senses 100% of the time, and it would have shown exactly that in a world where every advisory was same-sense. This is the same defect as the paper’s subject, one layer further out: an observation derived from the same source as the expectation cannot contradict it. We report it because it bears directly on prevalence. A reader may reasonably ask why a defect of this size was never noticed in operation, and the answer is that the only instrument pointed at it was state-anchored. 

A second defect, from reading the standard. Writing an oracle for which aircraft receives which sense required the selection rule rather than our own logic. Airborne collision avoidance system ( ACAS ) guidance selects the sense giving the greater vertical distance and, where an altitude crossing is projected, the sense that avoids crossing. Our tiebreak did the opposite, sending the lower aircraft up through the higher one. Because the tie is the common case, crossing advisories were the default behaviour. 

Two rounds, and the one that failed is the informative one. Both rounds recorded predictions before the runs, in the same committed form as Section 7. The first predicted a score of 32 to 48% and scored 1 of 5: the measured figure was 29.81%, and directionScore , which we had named as the function that would move, recovered exactly zero mutants. The diagnosis was that the new property constrained the relation between the two senses and not their assignment to aircraft, so a mutation that swaps which aircraft climbs still satisfies it. That is not anchoring. It is the adjacent failure Section 3 warns about, a one-directional oracle satisfied by code that does too little, and the two should not be conflated. The second round tested that diagnosis and scored 6 of 6, including its stated falsifier: direc-tionScore moved for the first time, by 8 of its 23. The sharpest number is not the score but a control. Inverting the sense assignment reverses which aircraft climbs in every tied encounter, and the pre-existing suite, 3,824 tests by the time of this round, passed unchanged, while the 5-property suite scored identically, to the mutant , before and after. A semantic reversal of the module’s pri-mary output was invisible to everything that existed to check it. 

What this does and does not establish. It does not establish prevalence. It is one module of one system, and the module was chosen by this study’s own survivor clustering, not at random. That selection is the result’s mechanism: the analysis said where to look and a defect was there. What it establishes is that the clustering is diagnostic rather than descriptive. Both defects reached deployment, neither was found by use, and both were found by writing the oracle the analysis said was absent. 25 9 Threats to validity 

## 9.1 Internal validity 

Scores are not random variables here. A score over a generator-driven suite is in principle a random variable, and we carried that as a threat until we measured it. Ten repetitions across the two suites that pin no seed returned identical kill counts, scores and property-only sets, down to which mutants were property-only. At 150 to 400 cases per property detection is close to binary: a mutant that changes anything an oracle examines dies on essentially every draw and one that does not dies on none, so no borderline population remains for a seed to move. Ravi and Coblenz found 96% of their mutations within 350 inputs [49]. This is evidence, not proof, covering two suites over two modules plus a 3-run check on a third, and it should not be confused with a historical flake in this project’s bearing-reciprocity property: that was a defect in the oracle surfacing on rare inputs, not a mutant escaping detection. Seed sensitivity exists here for oracle defects while mutant detection is deterministic. 

The partition, and a conservatism claim that does not survive. A test partition assigned by reading imports invites the argument that sweeping incidental files into the example category makes the study conservative with respect to its claims about properties. We made that argument to our-selves and it does not hold: the rule it assumed was applied to two modules and inverted on the other two, so the direction of the bias was not consistent enough to be claimed in either direc-tion. The coverage-derived partition of Section 4 replaces it and is reproducible from the reports themselves rather than from a reading of the test files. 

Mutant counts are not independent evidence. Discarding subsumed mutants is named as best practice for empirical mutation studies [47]. We ran it on the two populations that carry the inter-ventions, and it confirms the concern rather than relieving it. The 8 mutants re-anchoring recovers form one subsumption class and the 4 state anchoring costs form two, so a count of recovered mutants substantially reflects how many replacements a syntactic site admits. Section 7 reports both and gives the density-independent comparison alongside them. We did not run it on the other two populations, where no intervention is claimed. The 3 zero-recovery instances in Table 4 are unaffected, since zero is zero under any counting rule. 

The operator set cannot reach specification constants. Tool choice is itself a documented source of divergence between mutation studies [47]. Ours is StrykerJS throughout, and it ships no numeric-literal mutator, so the configuration constants our repaired oracles compose from cannot be perturbed by any mutant in these populations. Our "specification-anchored" therefore overlaps with "anchored on something this tool cannot mutate." We think the overlap benign, since mutating a specification constant mutates the specification and not the implementation and an oracle that tracks it is behaving correctly, but we did not measure that and a tool with a literal mutator would be needed to. 26 9.2 Construct validity 

Equivalent mutants and comparability. Our equivalence treatment is described in Section 4 and is exhaustive on only two of 4 modules. Our denominator includes uncovered mutants and our timeouts count as killed, both Stryker defaults; under the covered-only convention [53] the as-found holding property figure reads 41.38 in place of 26.09 and the spread across the 4 modules narrows from 4.63 to 3.49. We publish both conventions and defend neither. No retrieved study keys mutant identity as we do, so the survivor-diff columns cannot be validated against anyone else’s, and any cross-paper comparison of our absolute percentages is meaningless without these statements. 

Mutation score is a proxy, and a contested one. Papadakis et al. show over a large corpus that correlations between mutation scores and real fault detection are weak once test suite size is controlled for [48], and their survey makes controlling for it standing advice in empirical mutation studies [47]. That finding bears on our two kinds of result very differently, and the distinction is the reason we report them separately. The mechanism results are ablations over a fixed mutant population with suite size held constant: the re-anchoring adds no assertion and removes none, the negative control changes an expectation’s provenance and nothing else, and the reference-model comparison holds the population fixed while varying only the oracle design. A difference in suite size cannot produce a difference between two runs that have the same tests. The property-only result is exposed to it, because the two suites differ by more than an order of magnitude in test count, 4 against 81 on the debounce and 43 against 1,708 on the angle module. That is why we report kills per test alongside it, and why the property-only count should be read as a statement about these two suites and not about the two styles. 

## 9.3 External validity 

Single system, single author. All measurements come from one simulator whose code, invariant suites and example tests were written by the same person, who also designed this study. A claim about the relative effectiveness of two testing styles is exactly the kind of claim one author’s habits can determine, and we have no defense that removes this. Three amendments are owed. The first widens it: that person worked throughout with a language model assistant (Section 4), and on the holding-geometry module carrying this paper’s central result the production code and both covering suites were authored in sessions with the same model, so oracle and code under test share an authoring source. The second cuts the other way, since a coding agent wrote the ablation repairs to a specification fixed in advance, which changes the authorship of the measured artifact for those runs. And this is a simulator, not certified avionics; the honest description is a deployed system with emergent temporal behavior and an external procedural specification, and we do not reach for safety-critical framing. These threats fall hardest on the property-only result and least on the mechanism, because a cancellation argument and a controlled ablation over a fixed population do not depend on who wrote the code. 

Four modules. Four is few, and they were chosen to span the structural range rather than sam-pled. We deliberately did not add more. The mechanism claim is algebraic and does not improve with more samples, and the binding constraint on the property-only result is one author and one 27 codebase, not the module count; more modules would move it from 3 mutants of 366 in one system to some larger number in the same one system. The ablations are a separate matter and there we did add a module, since Section 7.5 needed a fifth mutate target to vary the scope against. 

# 10 Propagation distance as a rival explanation 

Anchoring is not the first explanation we reached for, and it is not the first one a reader will reach for either. The obvious rival is propagation distance: the further a fault must travel from the mutated code to the point where an oracle looks, the more chances it has to be absorbed, so oracles far from the code they judge should detect less. That is a real effect, it is the standard reading of Voas’s model [66], and it was our working explanation for most of this study. We set it out here with the reasons we abandoned it, because a reader who suspects the two hypotheses are the same relabelled is owed the comparison. The first reason is that we never computed it. Our ordering of the modules was assigned by reading the code and describing some oracles as nearer to the fault than others. No distance was measured, and an explanation that is asserted by narration explains nothing. The second is that the quantity is not open, so measuring it would have been replication and not explanation. Niedermayr and Wagner define the minimal stack distance between test case and method and correlate it with mutation-based effectiveness across 21 projects [46]; Vera-Pérez et al. compute the same measure and relate it to their symptom diagnosis [63]; and Jahangirova et al. use the term itself [31]. The third is that the contrast which made distance look explanatory was an artifact of the partition. The ratio we had in hand was 94.74 over 28.26, a factor of 3.4 between two named modules, and it rested on a debounce example score of 21.05% that the coverage-derived partition of Section 4 raises to 89.47. The corrected spread across all 4 property scores is 4.63, and the pair ratio was in any case never the range. The fourth reason is the one that settles it, and it is a measurement and not an argument. Section 7.5 runs one unchanged oracle against two mutate scopes. The oracle, the harness, the aircraft and the code producing the value it reads are identical in both cells and stand in the same call relation, so whatever propagation distance means, it does not differ between them. Distance therefore predicts the same outcome in both cells. Anchoring predicts opposite outcomes, and the opposite outcomes are what we observed. The two hypotheses are distinguishable and the data pick one. 

What survives from the distance intuition is that it was reaching for something real with the wrong variable. The ordering it described is genuine; what determines that ordering is not how far the fault must travel but whether the yardstick travels with it, and anchoring predicts that ordering while also predicting the three interventions in Section 7, which distance does not. Neither hypothesis is the whole story, and Section 8 put a number on a third mechanism. Proving the new oracles could fail required, twice, disabling two sites rather than one: the ground-proximity inhibit tests each aircraft in a separate clause, and the parallel-approach exemption is implemented in both the conflict detector and the advisory controller. A single-site mutation in either pair survives an oracle that would otherwise catch it, because the redundant copy still holds. Redundant guards are a mechanism for survival that is neither anchoring nor distance, it is invisible to both predicates, and any prevalence figure that attributes all survivors to a single cause will 28 overcount. We did not measure how much of our own population it accounts for, and a study that separated the three would be worth more than another that argued between two of them. 

# 11 Implications 

The recommendation we draw is narrower than an endorsement of property-based testing and narrower than a criticism of it. 

Check the anchoring before writing more properties. It is a static question, it takes minutes per suite, and it does not require a mutant population. For each assertion, ask where the value on the expected side came from, and treat a value that flows from the module under mutation as a defect unless the anchored quantity does not size the comparison. The flow half of that predicate is decidable on the import-and-call graph, and no shipping linter or test-smell detector we swept implements even that much, which is a tractable tooling gap and not a research problem. The sizing half is not decidable and we do not claim it is: it took us a reading of each oracle. Two qualifications belong with that advice. The first is that a practitioner has no mutate target. Our predicate is defined relative to a declared mutate scope, and a reader not running mutation testing has none. What it reduces to is the question of whether the expected value is produced by the code the test is meant to be judging, which is a judgment about intent and not a property of a configuration; the module or package boundary is the usual proxy and is the one we would recommend. The second is that the scope is not a formality. Section 7.5 shows one unchanged oracle that is state-anchored under one target and not under another, so a report that an oracle is anchored is incomplete until it says anchored with respect to what. 

Model-freedom is not itself the risk; anchoring is. Our control in Section 7 shows that avoiding a reference model cost us nothing in detection on the module where we could measure it. The cost we did not price is subtler: model-freedom removes the obvious independent source of expected values, and the author then reaches for the running system, which is the move that does cost detection. Specification anchoring is the third option and it was available to us for free: the domain publishes its procedures, and the constants were already named in our own configuration. 

A green property suite is not evidence that its oracles discriminate. Our discipline already required a hand-picked mutation per oracle, recorded in a comment, and that practice did not surface the defect, because the author who wrote the tautology also chose the mutation used to test it. Generated mutants are cheap and they are chosen by something other than the author’s model of their own blind spots. 

Report property-only counts rather than scores. The scores in Table 1 would support several different and mutually inconsistent stories on their own. The survivor diff carries the information, and it must be read against the population. 29 12 Conclusion 

We measured whether the invariant oracles in a deployed air traffic control simulator detect faults, running the property suites and the example suites separately over identical mutant populations under a coverage-derived partition. Across 4 modules and 366 distinct mutants the property tests covering them add 3 mutants of detection over the hand-written tests that already existed, 4 once one of those suites is re-anchored, while remaining 6 to 33 times more efficient per test, so the finding is near-total overlap and not weakness. The cause is not care taken in writing the oracles but where their expectations are anchored: an oracle that obtains its expected value from the system’s own realized state cannot discriminate faults in whatever produces that state, when the anchored value sizes the comparison, because the fault moves both sides at once. We showed this three times, recovering 8 mutants by re-anchoring one oracle on the specification without adding an assertion, costing 4 by deliberately state-anchoring a healthy one, and turning the same repair from inert to worth 3 mutants by moving nothing but the declared mutate target. On the debounce population a reference-model suite killed exactly what specification anchoring killed, which places the risk in anchoring and not in model-freedom. The defect is already named at one of its four channels and, in the literature we retrieved, has not been measured at any of them; the published rule for detecting it, applied literally to our repair, would revert it. A green property suite is not evidence that the oracles in it discriminate, and the cheapest way to find out is to generate the mutants instead of choosing them. 

# Availability 

The dataset, the analysis program, and a self-contained reader that recomputes every table in this paper from the dataset with no other input are deposited at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo. 21940547 , which resolves to the latest version. Its README states what the dataset carries, why line and column positions are absent from it and not derivable from it, which measurements fall outside its scope, and an earlier version of the dataset whose identity scheme we broke ourselves before any of it was published. The simulator is not public: every number here can be recomputed and every diff re-derived, but no measurement can be re-run, because re-running one requires the simulator. 

# References     

> [1] Houssam Abbas, Bardh Hoxha, Georgios Fainekos, Jyotirmoy V. Deshmukh, James Kapinski, and Koichi Ueda. Conformance testing as falsification for cyber-physical systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1401.5200v2 , 2014. [2] Vincent Aranega, Julien Delplanque, Matias Martinez, Andrew P. Black, Stéphane Ducasse, Anne Etien, Christo-pher Fuhrman, and Guillermo Polito. Rotten green tests in java, pharo and python. Empirical Software Engi-neering , 26(6):Article 121, 2021. [3] ARCH-COMP falsification category. Arch-comp benchmark models and per-tool run scripts. GitLab repository, 2025. Accessed August 2026. [4] Roy Armoni, Limor Fix, Alon Flaisher, Orna Grumberg, Nir Piterman, Andreas Tiemeyer, and Moshe Y. Vardi. Enhanced vacuity detection in linear temporal logic. In CAV 2003, LNCS 2725 , pages 368–380. Springer, 2003. [5] Thomas Ball and Orna Kupferman. Vacuity in testing. In Tests and Proofs (TAP 2008), LNCS 4966 , pages 4–17. Springer, 2008.

30 [6] Earl T. Barr, Mark Harman, Phil McMinn, Muzammil Shahbaz, and Shin Yoo. The oracle problem in software testing: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , 41(5):507–525, 2015. [7] Ezio Bartocci, Leonardo Mariani, Dejan Niˇ ckovi´ c, and Drishti Yadav. Property-based mutation testing. In 

Proceedings of the 16th IEEE Conference on Software Testing, Verification and Validation (ICST 2023) , pages 222–233, 2023. [8] Ilan Beer, Shoham Ben-David, Cindy Eisner, and Yoav Rodeh. Efficient detection of vacuity in temporal model checking. Formal Methods in System Design , 18(2):141–163, 2001. [9] Maik Betka and Stefan Wagner. Extreme mutation testing in practice: An industrial case study. In 2021 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automation of Software Test (AST) , pages 113–116, 2021. [10] Soufiene Boukelloul, Nour El Houda Dehimi, Stéphane Galland, and Sofiane Zaidi. A mutation analysis-based approach for testing coordination mechanisms in multi-agent systems: Application to air traffic control systems. 

Ingénierie des Systèmes d’Information , 30(9):2233–2252, 2025. [11] T. Y. Chen, S. C. Cheung, and S. M. Yiu. Metamorphic testing: A new approach for generating next test cases. Technical Report HKUST-CS98-01, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, 1998. [12] Hana Chockler, Orna Kupferman, and Moshe Y. Vardi. Coverage metrics for temporal logic model checking. 

Formal Methods in System Design , 28(3):189–212, 2006. [13] Koen Claessen and John Hughes. Quickcheck: A lightweight tool for random testing of Haskell programs. In 

Proceedings of the Fifth ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Functional Programming (ICFP) , pages 268–279, 2000. [14] Oscar Cornejo, Fabrizio Pastore, and Lionel C. Briand. Mutation analysis for cyber-physical systems: Scalable solutions and results in the space domain. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , 48(10):3913–3939, 2022. [15] Decyphir Inc. Breach: a matlab toolbox for cps falsification and specification mining, version 1.11.4, 2024. Accessed August 2026. [16] Julien Delplanque, Stéphane Ducasse, Guillermo Polito, Andrew P. Black, and Anne Etien. Rotten green tests. In 2019 IEEE/ACM 41st International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) , pages 500–511, 2019. [17] Richard A. DeMillo, Richard J. Lipton, and Frederick G. Sayward. Hints on test data selection: Help for the practicing programmer. Computer , 11(4):34–41, 1978. [18] Federal Aviation Administration. Aeronautical information manual, chapter 5 section 3: En route procedures. Paragraph 5-3-8, Holding, 2026. Accessed August 2026. [19] Thomas Ferrère, Dejan Nickovic, Alexandre Donzé, Hisahiro Ito, and James Kapinski. Interface-aware signal temporal logic. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM International Conference on Hybrid Systems: Computation and Control (HSCC 2019) , pages 57–66, 2019. [20] Federico Formica, Tony Fan, Akshay Rajhans, Vera Pantelic, Mark Lawford, and Claudio Menghi. Simulation-based testing of simulink models with test sequence and test assessment blocks. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , 50(2):239–257, 2024. [21] Gordon Fraser and Andreas Zeller. Mutation-driven generation of unit tests and oracles. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , 38(2):278–292, 2012. [22] Vahid Garousi and Baris Küçük. Smells in software test code: A survey of knowledge in industry and academia. 

Journal of Systems and Software , 138:52–81, 2018. [23] Mihaela Gheorghiu and Arie Gurfinkel. VaqUoT: A tool for vacuity detection. In Formal Methods 2006, Tool Papers , 2006. [24] GoldMine project. Goldmine: automatic assertion generation for rtl designs. Accessed August 2026. 

31 [25] Harrison Goldstein, Joseph W. Cutler, Daniel Dickstein, Benjamin C. Pierce, and Andrew Head. Property-based testing in practice. In Proceedings of the 46th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE 2024) ,pages 1–13, 2024. [26] Yatin Hoskote, Timothy Kam, Pei-Hsin Ho, and Xudong Zhao. Coverage estimation for symbolic model check-ing. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference (DAC 1999) , pages 300–305, 1999. [27] Soneya Binta Hossain and Matthew B. Dwyer. Oracle-based test adequacy metrics: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06118v3 [cs.SE] , 2023. [28] John Hughes. Experiences with QuickCheck: Testing the hard stuff and staying sane. In Sam Lindley, Conor McBride, Phil Trinder, and Don Sannella, editors, A List of Successes That Can Change the World: Essays Ded-icated to Philip Wadler on the Occasion of His 60th Birthday , pages 169–186. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2016. [29] Chen Huo and James Clause. Improving oracle quality by detecting brittle assertions and unused inputs in tests. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Foundations of Software Engineering (FSE 2014) , pages 621–631, 2014. [30] International Civil Aviation Organization. Guidance material for the elaboration of a national programme for the implementation and operation of the 300 m (1 000 ft) reduced vertical separation minimum between fl 290 and fl 410 (rvsm). ICAO South American Regional Office, Lima, 2002. Accessed August 2026. [31] Gunel Jahangirova, David Clark, Mark Harman, and Paolo Tonella. Test oracle assessment and improvement. In Proceedings of the 25th International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis (ISSTA 2016) , pages 247–258, 2016. [32] Gunel Jahangirova, David Clark, Mark Harman, and Paolo Tonella. OASIs: Oracle assessment and improvement tool. In Proceedings of the 27th International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis (ISSTA 2018), Tool Demonstrations , pages 368–371, 2018. [33] Gunel Jahangirova, David Clark, Mark Harman, and Paolo Tonella. An empirical validation of oracle improve-ment. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , 47(8):1708–1728, 2021. [34] jest-community. eslint-plugin-jest, 2026. Accessed August 2026. [35] Yue Jia and Mark Harman. An analysis and survey of the development of mutation testing. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , 37(5):649–678, 2011. [36] Xiaoqing Jin, Alexandre Donzé, Jyotirmoy V. Deshmukh, and Sanjit A. Seshia. Mining requirements from closed-loop control models. IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems ,34(11):1704–1717, 2015. [37] James Kapinski, Xiaoqing Jin, Jyotirmoy V. Deshmukh, Alexandre Donzé, Yamaguchi, Hisahiro Ito, Kaga, Kobuna, and Sanjit A. Seshia. ST-Lib: A library for specifying and classifying model behaviors. Technical Report SAE Technical Paper 2016-01-0621, SAE International, 2016. [38] Katz, Geist, and Orna Grumberg. “have i written enough properties?” a method of comparison between specifi-cation and implementation. In CHARME 1999, LNCS 1703 , pages 280–297. Springer, 1999. [39] Michael Konstantinou, Renzo Degiovanni, and Mike Papadakis. Do LLMs generate test oracles that capture the actual or the expected program behaviour? arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.21136v1 [cs.SE] , 2024. [40] Orna Kupferman. Sanity checks in formal verification. In CONCUR 2006, LNCS 4137 , pages 37–51. Springer, 2006. [41] Leonidas Lampropoulos, Michael Hicks, and Benjamin C. Pierce. Coverage guided, property based testing. 

Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages , 3(OOPSLA):Article 181, 1–29, 2019. [42] Changwen Li, Joseph Sifakis, Rongjie Yan, and Jian Zhang. Rigorous simulation-based testing for autonomous driving systems: Targeting the achilles’ heel of four open autopilots. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.16914 , 2024. 

32 [43] Matias Martinez et al. RTj: rotten green test detection and refactoring for java, 2020. Accessed August 2026. [44] Matias Martinez, Anne Etien, Stéphane Ducasse, and Christopher Fuhrman. RTj: a java framework for detect-ing and refactoring rotten green test cases. In Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Software Engineering: Companion Proceedings (ICSE 2020 Companion) , pages 69–72, 2020. [45] Claudio Menghi, Paolo Arcaini, Walstan Baptista, Gidon Ernst, Georgios Fainekos, Federico Formica, Sauvik Gon, Tanmay Khandait, Atanu Kundu, Giulia Pedrielli, Jarkko Peltomäki, Ivan Porres, Rajarshi Ray, Masaki Waga, and Zhenya Zhang. ARCH-COMP 2023 category report: Falsification. In Proceedings of the 10th International Workshop on Applied Verification of Continuous and Hybrid Systems (ARCH23), EPiC Series in Computing 96 , pages 151–169, 2023. [46] Rainer Niedermayr and Stefan Wagner. Is the stack distance between test case and method correlated with test effectiveness? In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Evaluation and Assessment in Software Engineering (EASE 2019) , pages 189–198, 2019. [47] Mike Papadakis, Marinos Kintis, Jie Zhang, Yue Jia, Yves Le Traon, and Mark Harman. Mutation testing advances: An analysis and survey. In Advances in Computers , volume 112, pages 275–378. Elsevier, 2019. [48] Mike Papadakis, Donghwan Shin, Shin Yoo, and Doo-Hwan Bae. Are mutation scores correlated with real fault detection? a large scale empirical study on the relationship between mutants and real faults. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) , pages 537–548, 2018. [49] Savitha Ravi and Michael Coblenz. An empirical evaluation of property-based testing in python. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages , 9(OOPSLA2):Article 412, 3897–3923, 2025. [50] Paul T. Robinson. Detect rotten green tests (issue 3811). GitHub issue, google/googletest, 2022. Accessed August 2026. [51] Renaud Rwemalika, Sarra Habchi, Mike Papadakis, Yves Le Traon, and Marie-Claude Brasseur. Smells in system user interactive tests. Empirical Software Engineering , 28(1), 2022. [52] Robert G. Sargent. Verification and validation of simulation models. Journal of Simulation , 7(1):12–24, 2013. [53] David Schuler and Andreas Zeller. Assessing oracle quality with checked coverage. In Proceedings of the 4th IEEE International Conference on Software Testing, Verification and Validation (ICST 2011) , pages 90–99, 2011. [54] Sergio Segura, Gordon Fraser, Ana B. Sánchez, and Antonio Ruiz-Cortés. A survey on metamorphic testing. 

IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , 42(9):805–824, 2016. [55] Donghwan Shin. Towards safety-aware mutation testing for autonomous driving systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.26456 , 2026. [56] SKYbrary. Holding pattern. SKYbrary Aviation Safety article, citing ICAO Doc 8168 PANS-OPS Vol. 1. Accessed August 2026. [57] Elvys Soares, Manoel Aranda III, Davi Romão, and Márcio Ribeiro. The open catalog of test smells. Sphinx documentation site and source repository, 2023. Accessed August 2026. [58] SonarSource. SonarJS rule implementations, rules s5863 and s5914. Accessed August 2026. [59] Stryker Mutator project. Mutant states and metrics. Project documentation, 2026. Accessed August 2026. [60] Valerio Terragni, Gunel Jahangirova, Paolo Tonella, and Mauro Pezzè. Evolutionary improvement of assertion oracles. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM Joint European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE 2020) , pages 1178–1189, 2020. [61] TestSmells project. tsdetect (testsmelldetector), 2022. Accessed August 2026. [62] Oscar Luis Vera-Pérez, Benjamin Danglot, Martin Monperrus, and Benoit Baudry. A comprehensive study of pseudo-tested methods. Empirical Software Engineering , 24(3):1195–1225, 2019. 

33 [63] Oscar Luis Vera-Pérez, Benjamin Danglot, Martin Monperrus, and Benoit Baudry. Suggestions on test suite improvements with automatic infection and propagation analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.04770v1 [cs.SE] ,2019. [64] Enrico Viganò, Oscar Cornejo, Fabrizio Pastore, and Lionel C. Briand. Data-driven mutation analysis for cyber-physical systems. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , 49(4):2182–2201, 2023. [65] vitest-dev. eslint-plugin-vitest, 2026. Accessed August 2026. [66] Jeffrey M. Voas. PIE: A dynamic failure-based technique. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering ,18(8):717–727, 1992. [67] Hasini Witharana, Yangdi Lyu, Subodha Charles, and Prabhat Mishra. A survey on assertion-based hardware verification. ACM Computing Surveys , 54(11s):Article 225, 1–33, 2022. [68] Yucheng Zhang and Ali Mesbah. Assertions are strongly correlated with test suite effectiveness. In Proceedings of the 10th Joint Meeting on Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE 2015) , pages 214–224, 2015. 

34