Title: Viverra: Text-to-Code with Guarantees

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.14972v1

Published Time: Fri, 15 May 2026 01:36:38 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
# VIVERRA : Text-to-Code with Guarantees 

Haoze Wu 1,2, Rocky Klopfenstein 1, Keith Farkas 2, Nina Narodytska 2

> 1

Amherst College 2Broadcom 

{hwu,rklopfenstein27}@amherst.edu {keith.farkas,nina.narodytska}@broadcom.com 

## Abstract 

A fundamental limitation of Text-to-Code is that no guarantee can be obtained about the correctness of the generated code. Therefore, to ensure its correctness, the generated code still has to be reviewed, tested, and maintained by developers. However, parsing through LLM-generated code can be tedious and time-consuming, potentially negating the productivity gains promised by AI-coding tools. To address this challenge, we present V IVERRA , a system that automatically produces formally verified annotations alongside generated code to aid user’s understanding of the generated program. Given a natural-language task description, V IVERRA prompts an LLM to synthesize a C program together with candidate assertions expressing safety and correctness properties. It then verifies those assertions in a compositional and best-effort manner via a portfolio of bounded model checkers. Evaluation on 18 diverse programming tasks suggests that V IVERRA can efficiently generate code with verified assertions, and that these assertions improve users’ performance on code-comprehension tasks in a user study with more than 400 participants. 

## 1 Introduction 

Text-to-Code based on Large Language Models (LLMs) can significantly improve software devel-opment productivity. However, LLM-generated code is opaque: subtle bugs, incorrect logic, and violated assumptions can all slip through unnoticed. In practice, developers must manually review or rewrite LLM-produced programs before they can trust them, an overhead that risks negating the productivity gains promised by AI coding tools. Since Text-to-Code fundamentally cannot guarantee that the generated code correctly implements the natural language specification at any level of detail, human involvement is still unavoidable. We therefore argue that a key bottleneck in Text-to-Code is that developers lack efficient ways to check the generated code. In this paper, we ask the following question: How can we help the developer to understand and analyze AI-generated code? 

A standard answer to this question is to perform thorough testing . However, generated code can be large, the logic can be non-trivial, and tests only witness correctness on a finite number of inputs; they cannot reliably characterize general program behavior across a wide range of execution traces. On the other hand, full formal verification, e.g., through proof assistants such as Lean or Rocq, has the potential to provide the user with absolute guarantees about the behavior of the program. However, requiring a complete formal proof for every generated program is impractical: even with the aid of LLMs, program verification in proof assistants can still be time-consuming and challenging (First et al . , 2023; Jiang et al . , 2022). Therefore, there is room for practical methods between these two extremes, that is, approaches that provide stronger guarantees than testing without requiring full formal verification. To explore this gap, we propose V IVERRA , a novel Text-to-Code framework. The goal of V IVERRA is to provide developers with proven statements about program behavior while keeping the cost of obtaining that information practical. The design of V IVERRA makes several important compromises to achieve this goal. First, it puts forward the idea of partial co-specification : co-generating code together with properties of the code 

> Preprint.
> arXiv:2605.14972v1 [cs.SE] 14 May 2026

in the form of assertions. These properties capture requirements from the natural language description of the program functionality. Usually, they express safety and correctness properties of the code. These assertions serve simultaneously as partial specifications and as targets for formal verification. Second, we carefully design a best-effort verification procedure. We propose using bounded program verification to check these assertions in a best-effort manner: we do not require every assertion to be fully verified, making our verification incomplete by design. The key insight is that even incomplete verification is valuable: an assertion confirmed to hold on all executions within a bounded depth is a formally grounded fact that the developer can rely on, helping them understand the properties of the code and narrowing what must be reviewed manually. To test the feasibility of V IVERRA , we perform an evaluation on 18 practical Text-to-C-Code tasks that goes beyond simple benchmarks seen in canonical datasets such as HumanEval (Chen et al . ,2021) and MBPP (Austin et al . , 2021). We found that V IVERRA can efficiently generate complex programs with multiple verified assertions, and a further user study suggests those verified facts are meaningful enough to boost program comprehension in practice. To summarize, our contributions include the following: • We introduce V IVERRA , an end-to-end Text-to-Code workflow that synthesizes C pro-grams from natural-language descriptions and automatically produces formally verified annotations. • We propose the idea of partial co-specification : the LLM co-generates both a program and partial correctness properties from the same natural-language task description, turning those properties into assertions that serve as partial specifications. • We design a best-effort compositional verification procedure that uses call-graph structure and previously verified assertions as assumptions, allowing bounded model checking to produce both unconditional and conditional guarantees. • We prove that every verified property is sound within the stated loop-unwind bound, and that conditional facts are sound under their recorded dependency assumptions. • We evaluate V IVERRA on 18 diverse Text-to-Code benchmarks and show that it can generate and verify meaningful annotations efficiently; a user study further shows that these verified properties improve code comprehension compared to unannotated generated programs. 

## 2 Preliminaries 

We consider the following setting. A developer provides a natural-language task description D. An LLM produces a program P intended to implement D. Our goal is to automatically produce a set of verified facts , formally grounded statements about the behavior of P, that help the developer understand and audit the generated code, without requiring the developer to write any specification. In this section, we introduce the key concepts of V IVERRA .

Definition 1 (Program/Call graph) . A program P consists of global code (headers, macros, type definitions) and a finite set of functions F(P). The call graph G(P) is a directed graph over F(P)

where an edge (f → g) exists if f calls g, annotated with the logical line of the call site in f .

Definition 2 (Assertion) . An assertion is a triple a = ⟨f, l, ϕ ⟩ where f ∈ F (P) is a function name, 

l ∈ N is a line number in f , a position between consecutive non-assertion statements, and ϕ is a Boolean predicate over program variables in scope at l. We write A(P) for the set of all assertions in 

P. The line numbers are counted over the assertion-free skeleton of f , so l is stable under insertion or removal of assertions. We adopt the loop-unwinding semantics standard in bounded model checking (Clarke et al . , 2004). 

Definition 3 (k-Bounded Execution) . A k-bounded execution of a program P is any execution in which every loop back-edge is traversed at most k times; the model checker asserts false at the 

(k+1) -th iteration to detect violations of the bound. We write Exec k(P) for the set of all k-bounded executions of P.

Definition 4 (Bounded Invariant) . Given a program P, an assertion a = ⟨f, l, ϕ ⟩, and a bound k ∈ N,we say a is a k-bounded invariant of P, written BInv k(P) ∋ a, if ϕ evaluates to true at line l of f

on every execution in Exec k(P).2Partial co-specification        

> Best-effort verification
> NL task description D
> Property elicitation Π
> Annotated program P+
> Program synthesis P0
> Bound reduction P+
> k
> Call-graph traversal
> Compositional verification
> Assertion statuses
> Fact translation
> Code with verified facts
> Developer review
> verified only
> bounds / conditions

Figure 1: Overview of V IVERRA .Bounded invariants are decidable and can be checked with a Bounded Model Checker via Definition 3; full invariance over all executions is undecidable in general. A k-bounded invariant provides a formal guarantee for all executions within the stated bound. 

Definition 5 (Assumption) . Given a program P and a set of assertions S =

{⟨ f1, l 1, ϕ 1⟩ , . . . , ⟨fn, l n, ϕ n⟩} , Asm (P, S ) denotes the program obtained by treating each assertion in S as an assumption, which renders any execution on which ϕi is false infeasible ,pruning it from the model checker’s search space. Formally: 

Exec k(Asm (P, S )) =  e ∈ Exec k(P) ∀ ⟨ fi, l i, ϕ i⟩ ∈ S, ϕ i holds at line li of fi in e .

An assumption restricts the set of executions considered by the model checker to those consistent with S: only executions in which all ϕi hold are explored, without triggering assertion failures for those locations. 

Definition 6 (Verification Status) . Given a program P, an ordered assertion sequence t =[a1, . . . , a m], and a bound k, the verification status of ai is one of: • V ERIFIED : ai is a k-bounded invariant of P.• C-V ERIFIED (S): ai is a k-bounded invariant of Asm (P, S ), where S is a set of assertions. • F ALSIFIED : the model checker finds a k-bounded counterexample to ai even under S.• U NKNOWN : verification times out. 

## 3 Methodology 

Figure 1 shows an overview of the V IVERRA workflow. In a nutshell, V IVERRA takes a natural-language description as input and generates a program annotated with a set of formally verified facts, each tagged with the conditions and bound under which it was established. These additional facts make the task of analyzing and validating generated code easier for the developer, as our user study confirms. Next, we describe the workflow in detail. 

3.1 The V IVERRA Pipeline 

Algorithm 1 describes the V IVERRA workflow, and Figure 1 visualizes its main steps. The figure also highlights how two central ideas underlying the workflow, partial co-specification and best-effort verification , are implemented in the framework. V IVERRA starts by generating properties Π (line 1) and synthesizing the initial program P0 (line 2) from D. The goal of the property elicitation step is to generate safety and correctness properties that the program should satisfy based on the user description. As a result, it produces a set of properties Π = {π1, . . . , π n} in natural language. Figure 2 shows an example of such a set for an excerpt from the ‘Bubble Sort’ task: π1 and π2 are two properties for this task formulated in natural language. These serve as a conceptual checklist for assertion generation. Next, V IVERRA generates a C program P0. Here, we instruct the LLM to perform verification-friendly synthesis , e.g., to avoid recursion, with verifiability as a design constraint (see Appendix C.2 for the prompt). Given P0 and Π, V IVERRA performs assertion generation (line 3). It annotates P0 with assertions that are expressed as assert statements in C code at appropriate locations throughout the program, producing P+. Assertions may appear at function boundaries (preconditions at entry, postconditions before returns), at loop invariant points, or wherever a property 3Algorithm 1 The V IVERRA Pipeline 

Require: Natural-language description D, loop-unwind bound k

Ensure: Program P0 annotated with verified facts 

1: Π ← PROPERTY ELICIT (D) ▷ LLM: NL safety/correctness properties 

2: P0 ← SYNTHESIZE (D) ▷ LLM: verification-friendly C program 

3: P+ ← ANNOTATE (P0, Π) ▷ LLM: embed assert() statements 

4: P+ 

> k

← BOUND REDUCE (P+, k ) ▷ LLM: tighten loop-bound constants so loops iterate ≤ k times 

5: t ← CGT RAVERSAL (P+ 

> k

) ▷ order assertions by call graph 

6: (IG , F ) ← VERIFY ALL (P+ 

> k

, t, k )

7: M ← MAP TOPROPERTIES (P+ 

> k

, Π) ▷ LLM: assertion → property 

8: return EMBED FACTS (P0, IG , M ) ▷ translate to NL facts in code                    

> Task description D
> “Write a program that im-plements the Bubble Sort algorithm to sort an array of integers in ascending order.”
> Property elicitation Π
> π1: The global swap counter equals the total number of adjacent swaps.
> π2: After all passes complete, the array is sorted in non-decreasing order: ∀k. 0≤
> k∧k+ 1 < n ⇒arr [k]≤arr [k+ 1] .
> Program synthesis P0
> void bubble_sort(int arr[], int n, int *total_swaps) { int i, j, swapped; int local_total_swaps = 0; for (i = 0; i < n - 1; i++) { ... }*total_swaps = local_total_swaps; }
> Annotated program P+
> void bubble_sort(int arr[], int n, int *total_swaps) { int i, j, swapped; int local_total_swaps = 0; for (i = 0; i < n - 1; i++) { swapped = 0; for (j = 0; j < n - 1 - i; j++) { if (arr[j] > arr[j + 1]) { int tmp = arr[j]; arr[j] = arr[j + 1]; arr[j + 1] = tmp; local_total_swaps++; swapped = 1;} }if (!swapped) break;} *total_swaps = local_total_swaps;
> a1assert(*total_swaps == local_total_swaps);
> a2assert(is_sorted_non_dec(arr, n)); }

Figure 2: Example of partial co-specification for a function in the ‘Bubble Sort’ program. From the same task description D, V IVERRA co-generates candidate properties Π and an initial program P0.The properties are then inserted into the program as assertions, producing P +. The red labels show how each elicited property is linked to the corresponding generated assertion. from Π is most naturally expressed. Helper functions returning bool may be introduced for complex conditions. Figure 2 shows P+ and examples of assert statements a1 and a2 that correspond to properties π1 and π2, where a2 asserts a helper function. The next step is to perform best-effort verification of the generated assertions in P+. We perform it in two phases. First, we perform a preprocessing step, bound reduction , at line 4. The goal is to make 

P+

k loop-bound tight : no loop should reach its (k+1) -th iteration on any input to P+

k . As noted in Definition 3, the model checker asserts false at the (k+1) -th iteration of every loop; if any loop can legitimately run beyond k iterations, this unwinding assertion is violated, causing a spurious failure unrelated to the program’s actual properties. In practice, the LLM reduces compile-time loop-bound constants so that every loop iterates at most k times. Next, we perform compositional verification ,which we discuss in detail in the next section. The final step is to compile facts for the developer, fact generation , and present them to the user; this step is described in Section 3.3. 

3.2 Compositional Verification 

VIVERRA has to verify programs with multiple annotations across different functions. Therefore, we employ a compositional verification procedure that accounts for and leverages these interdependencies. To retrieve such dependencies, we first perform an analysis of the program and construct a call graph (line 5). CGT RAVERSAL produces a linear ordering of A(P+

k ) by performing a depth-first traversal of G(P+

k ) from main , with cycle avoidance. For each function f , its assertions are collected in logical-line order. When f calls g at logical line lc, the traversal of g is inserted into f ’s assertion list immediately before f ’s assertions at lines ≥ lc. By construction, for every call edge (f → g)

at line lc, all assertions of g precede all assertions of f at lines ≥ lc in t. This ensures that callee postconditions are available as assumptions when verifying caller assertions that follow the call. Given t, we perform the main verification loop in line 6, outlined in Algorithm 2. 4Algorithm 2 processes assertions ai one by one in sequence order. The algorithm maintains an implication graph IG that stores logical dependencies between the ith assertion and a preceding assertions in the order. We also keep track of falsified assertions in F . For each ai, Algorithm 2 attempts a standalone check (line 3): does ai hold with no additional assumptions? We denote by 

Vk(P, ∅, a i) a call to the automated reasoning tool that runs the bounded model checker on P with ai

as the target assertion and loop-unwind bound k. It returns one of {Verified , Falsified , Unknown } 1.If the check succeeds, we obtain a verified assertion with no dependencies. Otherwise, the algorithm attempts a compositional check (line 8): does ai hold when all preceding assertions S = {aj : j < i }

are promoted to assume() statements? Here, Asm (P, S ) denotes the program obtained by treating each assertion in S as an assumption. If this check succeeds, we obtain a verified assertion under the assumption that the assertions in S hold. Otherwise, we mark it as failed and add it to F (line 12). Promoting earlier assertions to assumptions is sound because they represent facts about earlier program points that, if verified themselves, are guaranteed to hold. Next, we prove properties of VERIFY ALL . We denote index (IG ) the set of all keys in the dictionary structure IG .

Theorem 1 (Soundness of V ERIFY ALL ). Let P be a program, t = [ a1, . . . , a m] an assertion sequence, k a bound, and (IG , F ) = VERIFY ALL (P, t, k ). For every i ∈ index (IG ) with ai =

⟨fi, l i, ϕ i⟩:1. If IG [i] = ∅, then ϕi holds at line li of fi on every execution in Exec k(P).2. If IG [i] = S̸ = ∅, then ϕi holds at line li of fi on every execution in Exec k(Asm (P, S )) .

Proof. See Appendix A. The theorem establishes that each assertion is sound with respect to assumptions S that it depends on. 

3.3 Fact Generation 

Since a dependency set of an assertion a may itself contain independently verified and conditionally verified assertions, we can tighten the set of assertions that a depends on by iteratively back-tracing its dependencies to “root” assertions. We formalize this via the dependency closure. 

Definition 7 (Dependency Closure) . Given an implication graph IG output by V ERIFY ALL , the 

dependency closure of assertion ai is defined inductively: 

Deps (ai) = [ 

> aj∈IG [i]

Deps (aj ).

When i̸ ∈ index (IG ) (i.e., ai is unverified), Deps (ai) = {ai}; and when IG [i] = ∅ (i.e., ai is VERIFIED ), Deps (ai) = ∅.Because Algorithm 2 records IG explicitly, the dependency closure Deps (ai) is checkable automati-cally. We now prove that soundness is preserved under this tightened set of assumptions. 

Theorem 2 (Sound assumptions) . Under the hypotheses of Theorem 1, for every i ∈ index (IG )

with ai = ⟨fi, l i, ϕ i⟩, ϕi holds at line li of fi on every execution in Exec k(Asm (P, Deps (ai))) .

Proof. See Appendix A. After verification and dependency analysis, each VERIFIED or C-V ERIFIED assertion is translated by VIVERRA into a natural-language statement and embedded as a comment in P0, where K is the bound under which it was established: • A V ERIFIED statement is tagged //FACT[k= K ].• A C-V ERIFIED statement is tagged //FACT[k= K, cond] and is accompanied by the index set Deps (ai) (Definition 7).   

> 1In practice, UNKNOWN indicates that the solver exhausted its time budget without reaching a conclusion; such assertions are excluded from the output.

5Algorithm 2 VERIFY ALL : Compositional Verification                                                              

> Require: Program P, assertion sequence t= [ a1, . . . , a m], bound k
> Ensure: Implication graph IG , falsified set F
> 1: IG ← {} ;F← {}
> 2: for i←1to mdo
> 3: r← V k
>  P,∅, a i
> ▷standalone: no assumptions
> 4: if r=Verified then
> 5: IG [i]← ∅
> 6: else
> 7: S← { aj:j < i }
> 8: r← V k
>  Asm (P, S ),∅, a i
> ▷compositional: assume all preceding
> 9: if r=Verified then
> 10: IG [i]←S
> 11: else if r=Falsified then
> 12: F←F∪ { i}
> 13: return (IG , F )

By Theorem 2, every presented fact is formally grounded: a developer who accepts the stated conditions for C-V ERIFIED facts obtains a sound guarantee for all k-bounded executions of the program. These fact-annotated programs are what developers receive and empirically improve developers’ comprehension of the program. 

## 4 Implementation 

We implemented a prototype of V IVERRA in Python. We now describe the key implementation choices for V IVERRA ’s LLM backend and verification engine. 

LLM backend. All prompting stages (property elicitation, synthesis, annotation, bound reduction, assertion-to-property mapping, and fact translation) call the OpenAI API. Responses are cached by a hash of the prompt and model so that repeated runs are reproducible and cost-free. Reasoning effort is set to low for synthesis and annotation to reduce latency, and can be increased for harder benchmarks. 

Portfolio model checker. Vk is implemented as a parallel portfolio of two bounded model checkers: CBMC (Clarke et al . , 2004) (run with and without the Bitwuzla (Niemetz and Preiner, 2023) SMT back-end) and ESBMC (Cordeiro et al . , 2012) (with Bitwuzla). All three solver configurations are launched concurrently; the portfolio returns as soon as any solver reaches a definitive answer. If all solvers time out within a per-assertion budget, the status is UNKNOWN . We use a default unwind bound of k = 5 and a per-solver timeout of 60 s. 

Assertion normalization. Before handing P+ to the model checker, V IVERRA flattens multi-line 

assert(...) statements onto a single line. This ensures that the logical line numbers in Definition 2 correspond exactly to the source positions seen by the parser, and that libclang can unambiguously identify each assertion’s location. 

Call-graph extraction. VIVERRA parses P+ 

> k

with libclang to obtain the call graph and per-function source extents. Assertions are extracted by regex, stripped from the function body to compute logical line numbers (Definition 2), and re-inserted during verification as either assert or assume by the 

Method.generate_with_assertions routine. Global code is preserved verbatim and prepended to every verification query. 

Compilation checks. Between every LLM-generation step, V IVERRA compiles the output with gcc 

and re-prompts on failure, feeding the compiler error back as additional context. This ensures that both P0 and P+ are syntactically valid before any verification is attempted. 

## 5 Experimental Evaluation 

In this section, we perform experimental evaluation of V IVERRA on a diverse set of Text-to-Code tasks. Concretely, we evaluate V IVERRA along two axes: • (Feasibility ): can V IVERRA generate programs and derive verified annotations for non-trivial Text-to-Code tasks? • ( Utility ): do those verified annotations help developers understand the generated code? 6Table 1: Verification results per benchmark. LLM (s) is total wall-clock time for all LLM calls (synthesis, annotation, bound reduction, mapping, translation); Verify (s) is total verification time.                                                                                                                   

> Benchmark #Assert VERIFIED C-V ERIFIED Unverified LLM (s) Verify (s)
> bubblesort 10 10 0036.6 2.9 condorcet 25 22 03172.5 253.0 connected_component 21 21 0095.7 127.5 shortest_path 25 24 01143.0 32.8 knapsack 23 15 44125.3 879.3 sudoku 49 43 06164.9 2077.6 tictactoe 85 85 00182.0 21.6 connect4 59 56 03459.3 981.0 numberle 34 32 02345.3 8.6 gaussian_elimination 17 17 0089.8 139.7 simplex 21 21 00234.0 163.2 log_timestamp_filter 20 18 11223.0 9.3 sort_timestamp 34 34 00121.3 24.0 shift_letter 19 19 00104.9 2.4 base_addition 23 9014 44.5 12.6 cellular_automata 17 17 00159.3 206.9 maze 32 31 0165.4 436.2
> Mean ±Std 30 .2±18 .627 .9±19 .00.3±1.01.3±3.4162 .8±108 .0316 .4±542 .7

5.1 Experimental Setup 

We evaluate on 18 diverse Text-to-Code tasks, from implementing the Simplex algorithm for deciding the feasibility of linear systems to parsing and filtering lines in a log file. Each task is specified by a natural-language description, which can be found in Appendix B; V IVERRA takes the description as input and automatically generates the corresponding program and verified assertions. We use GPT-5.1 with low reasoning for LLM calls and set the loop-unwind bound to k = 5 . The portfolio verification engine uses a per-assertion wall-clock timeout of 60 s. Experiments were run on a workstation equipped with AMD Ryzen Threadripper PRO 5945WX processors. 

5.2 Performance of V IVERRA on program-annotation co-synthesis 

Table 1 shows the per-task breakdown of assertion statuses. Depending on the complexity of the generated code, V IVERRA generates 10 to 85 assertions. The vast majority of generated assertions are verified by the model checker without any assumptions, confirming that V IVERRA can produce programs with assertions that are automatically verifiable. A small fraction cannot be verified in isolation but hold conditionally on earlier established facts. For most benchmarks the number of unverified assertions (falsified or timed out) is small, but base_addition is a clear outlier with 14 of 23 assertions falsified. Upon closer examination, these failures are not due to bugs in the program logic, but due to the over-approximation of certain operators by the verification tool which led to spurious counter-examples. LLM synthesis time ranges from 36.6 s to 459.3 s across benchmarks, which is reasonable given that each run involves multiple sequential LLM invocations (property elicitation, synthesis, annotation, bound reduction). Verification time varies considerably more, from 2.4 s ( shift_letter ) to 2077.6 s (sudoku ), driven by the complexity of the properties and programs. For example, sudoku timed out on assertions like board_is_partial_valid , which requires the model checker to reason about global row, column, and subgrid uniqueness simultaneously; similarly, knapsack ’s costliest assertion checks that the entire item array is sorted by density after a comparison-based sort. Such global relational properties are inherently harder for bounded model checking than local invariants. Nonetheless, as shown in the next section, V IVERRA was able to generate and verify meaningful assertions that help developers with program understanding. The current implementation verifies assertions sequentially, so total verification time grows linearly with the number of assertions. Parallelizing the verification loop—running independent assertion checks concurrently—is the most direct path to reducing wall-clock time, since each call to Vk is independent. More aggressive strategies include tightening the loop-unwind bound for assertions identified as expensive, or limiting the assertion budget per function to focus verification effort on the most informative properties. 75.3 Can verified annotations aid comprehension? 

We conducted a user study to evaluate whether verified annotations improve code comprehension. Concretely, we manually generated 10 multiple-choice questions, each anchored to a single verified assertion. Questions were designed to reference the underlying assertion without quoting it directly (e.g., “When the program prints the vertices of a connected component (line 159), what order are they in?” ). We then manually constructed three distractors per question, leading to a four-choice multiple-choice format. The raw surveys can be found in the supplementary materials. Each multiple-choice question was evaluated using Human Intelligence Tasks (HITs) on Mturk. Each HIT consisted of a single survey containing basic instructions, a C program with lines numbered for readability, and one multiple choice question. For each question, we consider two cases, one where the program is not annotated with verified facts, the other where the C program was annotated with //FACT: comments, which are natural language statements translated from verified assertions. For this experiment, we only added assertions that are independently verified (without assumptions). These translations were intended to preserve only the logic described by an assertion. The survey was set up such that there is no overlap between participants of the two HITs with respect to the same question. Each HIT was completed by at least 20 workers. All HITs shared the same basic worker qualifications: a HIT approval rate > 95% , a minimum of 1,000 approved HITs, and the MTurk job function qualifier Information Technology , targeting tech-adjacent participants. Each worker was allowed 3 minutes to complete the survey and paid $0.50 per HIT. Figure 3 summarizes the results. The top-left plot shows the fraction of participants that answer correctly for each question (accuracy). The accuracy is higher when the programs are annotated with verified facts on all but two questions. This suggests that the verified annotations denote information that is not immediately obvious to the participants and that can improve code comprehension. The remaining three plots examine response timing. Participants overall take less time to answer a question when annotations are present (top right). Among participants who answered correctly (bottom left), Group B is faster on 6/10 benchmarks, in particular, Group B participants are on average faster on the last two questions where the accuracy between Group A and group B is the same. Interestingly, on the first question (connected-comps[Vertice order]), Group B users spent significantly longer (96s vs. 82s) while achieving a significantly higher accuracy (100% vs. 40%). We speculate this is due to the overhead the user spent on reading the annotations. Overall, our experiment suggests that V IVERRA can improve practical code comprehension both in terms of accuracy in answering questions about the program and the response speed. 

## 6 Related Work 

LLM-based code synthesis. LLMs have demonstrated strong code generation capability across benchmarks spanning algorithmic problems (Chen et al . , 2021; Austin et al . , 2021; Li et al . , 2022) and real-world repositories (Jimenez et al . , 2024). These systems provide no correctness guarantees; developers must audit the output themselves. V IVERRA is orthogonal to any synthesis back-end: it augments generated code with formally verified annotations rather than improving generation quality. 

Verified code generation. A growing line of work pursues code generation with formal cor-rectness guarantees. Misu et al . (2024) evaluate LLMs on synthesizing Dafny methods with full contracts; Chen et al . (2024) synthesize Verus proof annotations for Rust via self-evolving fine-tuning; Clover (Sun et al ., 2024) iteratively verifies LLM-generated Dafny in a closed loop; Baldur (First et al . , 2023) generates and repairs whole Isabelle proofs with LLMs; Bursuc et al . (2025) introduce a large benchmark spanning Dafny, Verus, and Lean. All these approaches require verification-aware languages or complete formal proofs. V IVERRA instead targets C with push-button bounded model checking, trading proof completeness for practical accessibility. 

Specification generation. Daikon (Ernst et al . , 2007) discovers likely invariants from concrete exe-cutions, but these are heuristically inferred and may not hold on unobserved inputs. Lemur (Wu et al .,2024) integrates LLMs with automated verifiers to discharge invariants, but targets full verification of existing programs rather than co-synthesis. Recent work generates formal contracts (Richter and Wehrheim, 2025) or Hoare-style annotations (Bouras et al . , 2025) alongside code without formally verifying them. V IVERRA conducts best-effort formal verification for each generated specification. 8Group A (unannotated) Group B (annotated) 

Figure 3: Comparison of correctness and user-timing between treatment and control HITs. The plots visualize overall correctness (top-left) and total completion time (top-right), with further breakdowns of timing for correct (bottom-left) and incorrect (bottom-right) responses across all benchmarks. 

## 7 Conclusion 

We presented V IVERRA , an end-to-end pipeline that augments LLM-generated C programs with formally verified annotations to aid developer comprehension. Starting from a natural-language description, V IVERRA co-generates a program and candidate assertions, verifies them compositionally using a call-graph-aware procedure backed by a portfolio of bounded model checkers, and surfaces only the verified facts to the developer as natural-language comments. On 18 diverse Text-to-Code benchmarks, V IVERRA was able to successfully generate and verify a significant number of assertions. A user study with crowdworkers confirms that programs annotated with verified facts improve both answer accuracy and response speed compared to unannotated programs, demonstrating that V IVERRA produces verified annotations that are meaningful in practice. 

Limitations and future work. A fundamental limitation of V IVERRA is that it only provides guarantees up to a certain depth. This is a deliberate trade-off that keeps verification feasible for complex programs. In the future, it might be interesting to consider invoking AI-driven proof assistants to fully verify properties in a best-effort manner. While the scalability of bounded model checkers has improved significantly in the past two decades, V IVERRA can still be bottlenecked by the underlying verifiers and can only work with programs supported by the verifiers. Extending the approach to richer languages such as Python or Rust, and to heap properties and quantified invariants, are natural next steps. Finally, the quality of verified annotations depends on the LLM generating meaningful assertions. In the future, it would be interesting to consider alternative property elicitation strategies or design metrics to evaluate the quality of the generated assertions. Due to budget constraints, the human study was conducted with crowdworkers and at a relatively small scale. While the patterns we observed are clear and consistent, expanding the user study with professional developers in an offline setting on a larger set of questions would further establish the effectiveness of V IVERRA .9References 

Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Dohan, Ellen Jiang, Carrie Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le, et al . 2021. Program synthesis with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07732 (2021). Dimitrios Stamatios Bouras, Yihan Dai, Tairan Wang, Yingfei Xiong, and Sergey Mechtaev. 2025. HoarePrompt: Structural Reasoning About Program Correctness in Natural Language. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.19599 (2025). Sergiu Bursuc, Theodore Ehrenborg, Shaowei Lin, Lacramioara Astefanoaei, Ionel Emilian Chiosa, Jure Kukovec, Alok Singh, Oliver Butterley, Adem Bizid, Quinn Dougherty, et al . 2025. Abenchmark for vericoding: formally verified program synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.22908 

(2025). Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde De Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al . 2021. Evaluating large language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374 (2021). Tianyu Chen, Shuai Lu, Shan Lu, Yeyun Gong, Chenyuan Yang, Xuheng Li, Md Rakib Hossain Misu, Hao Yu, Nan Duan, Peng Cheng, et al . 2024. Automated proof generation for rust code via self-evolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.15756 (2024). Edmund Clarke, Daniel Kroening, and Flavio Lerda. 2004. A Tool for Checking ANSI-C Programs. In International Conference on Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems (TACAS) . Springer, 168–176. Lucas Cordeiro, Bernd Fischer, and João Marques-Silva. 2012. SMT-based Bounded Model Checking for Embedded ANSI-C Software. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 38, 4 (2012), 957– 974. Michael D Ernst, Jeff H Perkins, Philip J Guo, Stephen McCamant, Carlos Pacheco, Matthew S Tschantz, and Chen Xiao. 2007. The Daikon System for Dynamic Detection of Likely Invariants. 

Science of Computer Programming 69, 1–3 (2007), 35–45. Emily First, Markus N Rabe, Talia Ringer, and Yuriy Brun. 2023. Baldur: Whole-Proof Generation and Repair with Large Language Models. In Proceedings of the ACM on Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE) . ACM. Albert Q Jiang, Sean Welleck, Jin Peng Zhou, Wenda Li, Jiacheng Liu, Mateja Jamnik, Timothée Lacroix, Yuhuai Wu, and Guillaume Lample. 2022. Draft, sketch, and prove: Guiding formal theorem provers with informal proofs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.12283 (2022). Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2024. SWE-bench: Can Language Models Resolve Real-World GitHub Issues?. In 

International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Yujia Li, David Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kushman, Julian Schrittwieser, Rémi Leblond, Tom Eccles, James Keeling, Felix Gimeno, Agustin Dal Lago, et al . 2022. Competition-level code generation with alphacode. Science 378, 6624 (2022), 1092–1097. Md Rakib Hossain Misu, Cristina V Lopes, Iris Ma, and James Noble. 2024. Towards ai-assisted synthesis of verified dafny methods. Proceedings of the ACM on Software Engineering 1, FSE (2024), 812–835. Aina Niemetz and Mathias Preiner. 2023. Bitwuzla. In International Conference on Computer Aided Verification . Springer, 3–17. Cedric Richter and Heike Wehrheim. 2025. Beyond Postconditions: Can Large Language Models infer Formal Contracts for Automatic Software Verification? arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.12702 

(2025). Chuyue Sun, Ying Sheng, Oded Padon, and Clark Barrett. 2024. Clover: Closed-Loop Verifiable Code Generation. In International Workshop on AI Verification (SAIV) . Springer. 10 Haoze Wu, Clark Barrett, and Nina Narodytska. 2024. Lemur: Integrating Large Language Mod-els in Automated Program Verification. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) . https://openreview.net/forum?id=Q3YaCghZNt 

11 A Proofs 

Theorem 1 (Soundness of V ERIFY ALL ). Let P be a program, t = [ a1, . . . , a m] an assertion sequence, k a bound, and (IG , F ) = VERIFY ALL (P, t, k ). For every i ∈ index (IG ) with ai =

⟨fi, l i, ϕ i⟩:1. If IG [i] = ∅, then ϕi holds at line li of fi on every execution in Exec k(P).2. If IG [i] = S̸ = ∅, then ϕi holds at line li of fi on every execution in Exec k(Asm (P, S )) .

Proof. Both cases follow directly from the soundness of the underlying bounded model checker (Definitions 3–5): Vk returns Verified only when it finds no counterexample within bound k, meaning the assertion holds on all k-bounded executions of the submitted program ( P in case 1; Asm (P, S )

in case 2). 

Theorem 2 (Sound assumptions) . Under the hypotheses of Theorem 1, for every i ∈ index (IG )

with ai = ⟨fi, l i, ϕ i⟩, ϕi holds at line li of fi on every execution in Exec k(Asm (P, Deps (ai))) .

Proof. By structural induction on the definition of Deps (ai) (Definition 7). The induction is well-founded because Algorithm 2 ensures IG [i] ⊆ { aj : j < i }, so the dependency graph is acyclic. 

Base case : IG [i] = ∅. Then Deps (ai) = ∅, and Theorem 1 (1) gives that ϕi holds on every execution in Exec k(P) = Exec k(Asm (P, ∅)) = Exec k(Asm (P, Deps (ai))) .

Inductive step : IG [i] = S̸ = ∅, so Deps (ai) = S  

> aj∈S

Deps (aj ) by Definition 7. By Theorem 1 (2), 

ϕi holds on every execution in Exec k(Asm (P, S )) . It therefore suffices to show 

Exec k(Asm (P, Deps (ai))) ⊆ Exec k(Asm (P, S )) .

Let e ∈ Exec k(Asm (P, Deps (ai))) and aj ∈ S. We show ϕj holds on e:• If j /∈ index (IG ), then Deps (aj ) = {aj }, so aj ∈ Deps (ai), and ϕj is assumed in 

Asm (P, Deps (ai)) ; hence ϕj holds on e.• If IG [j] = ∅, then Theorem 1 (1) gives ϕj on all of Exec k(P) ∋ e.• If IG [j]̸ = ∅, the inductive hypothesis gives ϕj on every execution in 

Exec k(Asm (P, Deps (aj ))) . Since Deps (aj ) ⊆ Deps (ai), we have e ∈

Exec k(Asm (P, Deps (ai))) ⊆ Exec k(Asm (P, Deps (aj ))) , so ϕj holds on e.Since ϕj holds on e for every aj ∈ S, the execution e satisfies all assumptions of Asm (P, S ), i.e., 

e ∈ Exec k(Asm (P, S )) . Therefore ϕi holds on every execution in Exec k(Asm (P, Deps (ai))) .

## B Benchmark Descriptions 

The following 18 benchmarks are used in the evaluation (§5). Each entry gives the full natural-language task description used as input to V IVERRA . The descriptions are the verbatim prompts passed to the LLM; no other specification is provided to the system. 

bubblesort. Implement the Bubble Sort algorithm to sort an array of integers in ascending order. The program reads an integer n (1 ≤ n ≤ 100 ) followed by n integers from stdin. It applies the standard Bubble Sort—repeatedly comparing adjacent elements and swapping if out of order—then prints “Sorted Array:” followed by the sorted elements and the total number of swaps performed. 

connected_component. Read an adjacency matrix of an undirected graph and identify all connected components. Input: an integer V (1 ≤ V ≤ 100 ) followed by a V × V binary adjacency matrix. The matrix must be symmetric; if A[i][ j]̸ = A[j][ i], print “Invalid adjacency matrix” and terminate. For each connected component, print the vertex indices (0-indexed) in ascending order, one component per line, in discovery order. 12 shortest_path. Find the shortest path between two vertices in an unweighted graph using BFS. Input: an integer V (2 ≤ V ≤ 100 ), a V × V adjacency matrix, and source/destination indices start 

and end . Validate that start and end are in [0 , V −1] . Output “Path: u -> ...-> v” or “No path found” .

knapsack. Implement the Greedy algorithm for the Fractional Knapsack problem. Input: the number of items n and capacity W (double), followed by n pairs of value and weight (doubles). Sort items by value-to-weight ratio (descending); take items or fractions thereof until the knapsack is full. Print the total value to two decimal places and a breakdown of items used. 

sudoku. Implement a playable 4 × 4 Sudoku game using digits 1–4 with a hardcoded partially filled initial board. On each turn, display the board, prompt for row, column, and value (each in 1–4), and reject moves that violate Sudoku rules (out-of-range, pre-filled cell, or duplicate in row/column/ 2 × 2

subgrid). The game ends when the board is fully and correctly filled. 

tictactoe. Implement a two-player Tic-Tac-Toe game on a 3 × 3 grid (Player 1: X, Player 2: O). Alternately prompt each player for a row/column pair (1–3), reject out-of-range or occupied moves, check for three-in-a-row (horizontal, vertical, diagonal) after each valid move, and announce the winner or a draw. The game loop runs for at most MAX_TURN iterations. 

connect4. Implement a two-player Connect Four game on a 6 × 7 grid ( X vs. O, X first). On each turn, display the board, prompt for a column (1–7), and reject invalid or full columns. Apply gravity (piece falls to lowest available row), then check for four consecutive pieces horizontally, vertically, or diagonally. Announce the winner or a draw if the board is full; the loop runs for at most MAX_TURN 

turns. 

numberle. Implement a “Numberle” guessing game. The target is a hardcoded 6-character mathe-matical equation (e.g., 4*2=08 ). The player has 6 attempts; each guess must be 6 characters, contain exactly one =, and be mathematically true. After each valid guess, print a 6-character feedback string: 

G (correct position), Y (wrong position), or X (not present). End with a victory message or reveal the target after 6 failures. 

condorcet. Determine the Condorcet winner of an election. Input: n candidate names ( n ≤ 10 ), then v voter ballots ( v ≤ 100 ), each ballot a permutation of candidate indices from most to least preferred. Build a pairwise win matrix; a candidate is the Condorcet winner if they beat every other candidate head-to-head. Print “Condorcet Winner: [Name]” or “No Condorcet winner” .

gaussian_elimination. Solve an n × n system of linear equations using Gaussian elimination with partial pivoting. Input: integer n, then the n × (n+1) augmented matrix (doubles). Before each elimination step, swap the current row with the row having the largest absolute pivot value. If the pivot falls below 10 −9, print “No unique solution” . Otherwise perform back-substitution and print x1, . . . , x n to 4 decimal places. 

simplex. Check satisfiability of Ax = b with x ≥ 0 using the Simplex method. Input: integers m

and n (m, n ≤ 10 ), then the m × (n+1) augmented matrix. Use Bland’s rule (lowest index) for pivot selection to prevent cycling. If a row has all non-positive coefficients and a positive b value, print 

“UNSATISFIABLE” ; otherwise print “SATISFIABLE” and the variable values. 

log_timestamp_filter. Read a log file from stdin and print all lines whose timestamp year is strictly before 2024. Each log line begins with a timestamp in YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS format; lines shorter than 19 characters or longer than 248 characters are skipped. Parse the year from the first four characters; print matching lines verbatim. 

sort_timestamp. Read N ISO 8601 timestamps with UTC offsets in the format 

YYYY-MM-DDTHH:MM:SS[+/-]HH:MM (1 ≤ N ≤ 100 ), normalize each to UTC (handling date rollovers), sort chronologically, and print the original strings in sorted order. Timestamps violating the format or containing invalid values (e.g., month 13) are skipped with “Invalid Timestamp” .13 shift_letter. Read a single line of text from stdin (up to 1024 characters) and print the result of shifting every alphabetic character one step forward in the alphabet, wrapping z → a and Z → A.Non-alphabetic characters are unchanged. If the input exceeds 1024 characters, print “Input too long” and exit with a nonzero code. 

base_addition. Perform addition on two positive integers represented as strings in base n (2 ≤

n ≤ 10 ). Input: three space-separated tokens—the base n and two digit strings (up to 256 characters each). Validate the base and digits; perform column-by-column addition with carry; print the result in base n. Invalid base or digit triggers an error message and termination. 

cellular_automata. Simulate Conway’s Game of Life on a 2D toroidal grid (max 50 × 50 ). Read grid dimensions R and C and the initial state ( . = dead, # = alive) from stdin. Repeatedly compute the next generation using toroidal boundary conditions (neighbors wrap via modulo), display the grid with ANSI escape codes, and sleep 100 ms between iterations. 

maze. Find the shortest path from S to E in a maze (max 50 × 50 ) using BFS. Input: integers R

and C, followed by R lines of C characters ( # = wall, . = open, S = start, E = exit). Movement is restricted to four cardinal directions. If a path exists, print its length and display the maze with path cells replaced by *; otherwise print “No path found” .

## C LLM Prompts 

This appendix contains the four main prompts used by V IVERRA . Italicized placeholders ( {descrip-tion} , {program} , {properties} ) are filled at runtime with the corresponding artifact. 

C.1 Property Elicitation 

Used in Stage 1 (Section 3) to enumerate natural-language safety and correctness properties from the task description. 

> You are an expert C programmer. You need to generate a C program based on the following natural language description: {description} List safety/correctness properties of the program that performs this task in succinct natural language. The properties should be expressible as assertions in the code. Your answer should just be: 1. ... 2. ...

C.2 Verification-Friendly Program Synthesis 

Used in Stage 2 to generate the C program P0. The prompt enforces the structural constraints required for bounded verification. 

> You are an expert C programmer and verification-aware developer. Task: Generate a complete, working C program that implements the following specification: SPEC: {description} Constraints (must follow all): 1) Avoid using any third-party/external libraries. 2) Keep the program verification-friendly: - No recursion.

14 - No dynamic allocation (malloc/free). - No floating point. - No pointer arithmetic beyond array indexing. - Avoid undefined behavior (signed overflow, out-of-bounds, shifting by >= width, uninitialized reads). - Use fixed maximum sizes for arrays/buffers; validate lengths. - For strings, use strnlen() instead of strlen(). 3) Deterministic control flow for bounded verification: - Every loop must have clear static bounds (constants or validated input capped at a constant). - If a bound is configurable, declare it as a macro at the top (e.g., #define MAX_N 100). 4) Decomposable structure: - Provide small functions for each subtask (parsing, validation, core logic, output formatting). 5) I/O: - Read from stdin and write to stdout. - On invalid input, print an error and exit with nonzero code. 6) Output: - Return ONLY the full program as a single C file, wrapped in triple-backtick ‘‘‘c formatting. - Include a brief comment at the top stating assumptions and bounds. 

C.3 Assertion Generation 

Used in Stage 3 to annotate P0 with assert() statements expressing the properties Π.

You are an expert C programmer. You are given: Description: {description} A C program that implements the task: {program} Safety and correctness properties: {properties} Annotate the C program with assertions that express these properties as function contracts. Rules: - Treat each C function (including static functions and main) as a method. - Add preconditions as assert(...) at the very start of each function. - Add postconditions as assert(...) immediately before each return. For void functions, place postconditions before the closing brace. - Use only standard C assertions: assert(condition); - Include <assert.h>. - Do not add, remove, or modify existing code except for inserting assertions. - Helper functions (returning bool, called within assert, containing no assert themselves) are allowed. - Assertions may reference function parameters, return values (via existing variables), and globals in scope. Applicability: - Add an assertion only if it meaningfully applies to the function and can be soundly checked at the function boundary. - Do not add trivial assertions (assert(true), assert(1), x == x). - Only add assertions that enforce one of the listed properties. Output: - Output only the annotated C program in triple-backtick C formatting. - Do not include any explanation outside the code block. 

15 C.4 Verified Fact Translation 

Used in Stage 5 to translate verified assert() statements into natural-language //FACT: comments for the developer. 

You are an expert C programmer converting assertions in a C program into easily understandable natural-language facts. Goal: make assertions easier to understand for non-experts. Facts should represent the technical content of the assertion but be written in simple, accessible language. Do not give MORE information than the assertion. Do not interpret it---just translate it into simple natural language. Format: "//FACT: At this point in the program, ..." Replace each assertion statement with a //FACT: comment. Keep all other code exactly the same. Do not add code fences. C Program: {program} 

16