Title: Beyond Code Reasoning: A Specification-Anchored Audit Framework for Expert-Augmented Security Verification

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.26495v1

Published Time: Thu, 30 Apr 2026 01:00:02 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
# Beyond Code Reasoning: A Specification-Anchored Audit Framework for Expert-Augmented Security Verification 

# Masato Kamba 

masato.kamba@nyx.foundation Nyx Foundation Japan 

# Hirotake Murakami 

2009hirotake@gmail.com Aichi Prefectural Aichi High School of Technology and Engineering Japan 

# Akiyoshi Sannai 

sannai.akiyoshi.7z@kyoto-u.ac.jp Department of Physics, Kyoto University Japan Nyx Foundation Japan 

## Abstract 

Security-critical software is routinely audited by tools that rea-son about vulnerabilities as repository-local code patterns. Yet specification-governed systems—protocol stacks, consensus imple-mentations, cryptographic libraries—are constrained by invariants and correctness conditions defined in natural-language specifica-tions. When a vulnerability arises from what the specification re-quires rather than how code is written, code-level approaches lack the representational vocabulary to detect it, and their false positives resist systematic diagnosis. We present SPECA, a specification-anchored security audit framework that derives explicit, typed security properties from natural-language specifications and audits implementations through structured proof-attempt reasoning grounded in each property. The framework yields three capabilities absent from code-driven auditing: spec-dependent detections, controlled cross-implementation comparison under a shared property vocabulary, and false positives that decompose into interpretable, pipeline-phase-traceable root causes. On the Sherlock Ethereum Fusaka Audit Contest (366 submis-sions, 10 implementations), SPECA recovers all 15 in-scope vulnera-bilities and independently discovers 4 bugs confirmed by developer fix commits. On the RepoAudit C/C++ benchmark (15 projects), SPECA matches the best published precision (88.9%) while surfac-ing 12 candidate bugs beyond the established ground truth, two confirmed by upstream maintainers. A multi-model analysis reveals that more capable models audit more faithfully within property scope, shifting the detection bottleneck from model reasoning to property generation quality. All false positives trace to three recur-ring root causes—trust boundary misunderstanding, code reading errors, and specification misinterpretation—each yielding action-able improvement targets. 

## CCS Concepts 

• Security and privacy → Software and application security ;

Systems security ; • Computing methodologies → Artificial intel-ligence .

## Keywords 

security auditing, property-based verification, large language mod-els, specification mining, false positive analysis 

> CCS ’26, The Hague, The Netherlands
> 2026.

## 1 Introduction 

In a recent security contest, 366 auditors examined ten implemen-tations of the same cryptographic protocol specification. They col-lectively identified fifteen vulnerabilities—buffer overflows, logic errors, and consensus violations—all recognizable as local code de-fects. Yet the bug was absent from all adjudicated contest findings: a subtle defect in a core cryptographic library where the KZG proof verification routine passed the original commitment array rather than its deduplicated variant, silently undermining the mathemati-cal guarantee that the entire verification scheme depends on. The bug was not a coding mistake in any familiar pattern; it was a viola-tion of an invariant that the specification defines but no code-level auditing tool was designed to check. This scenario reflects a structural blind spot in security audit-ing. Security-critical systems—from network protocol stacks to dis-tributed consensus implementations to cryptographic libraries—are governed by natural-language specifications that encode invari-ants, trust boundaries, and correctness conditions. Yet the tools and methods that auditors rely on reason almost exclusively about 

repository-local code patterns : dataflow anomalies, API misuse, and syntactic bug templates. When a vulnerability arises not from how code is written but from what the specification requires , these ap-proaches lack the representational vocabulary to detect it—or to ex-plain why they missed it. The consequences extend beyond missed bugs: when a code-driven tool produces a false positive, there is no structured account of which security expectation it was attempting to verify, making triage slow and findings opaque. Recent advances in automated security analysis have produced increasingly sophisticated code-driven approaches. Repository-level auditing agents scan entire codebases for bug patterns and achieve broad coverage across diverse projects [ 6 ]. LLM-enhanced static analyzers combine program representations with language model reasoning to improve precision [ 10 , 11 ]. Property generation tools synthesize formal invariants from code to enable automated verification [ 13 ]. These approaches succeed when vulnerabilities manifest as recognizable code-level anomalies. However, they share a fundamental limitation: they begin from the code and work out-ward, rather than from the specification and work inward. As a result, they cannot express—let alone verify—whether an imple-mentation satisfies a security expectation that the specification defines but the code never explicitly encodes. Their false positives, consequently, resist systematic diagnosis: when a finding is wrong, there is no principled way to determine why the tool’s security reasoning diverged from reality.  

> arXiv:2604.26495v1 [cs.CR] 29 Apr 2026 CCS ’26, November 15–19, 2026, The Hague, The Netherlands Kamba, Murakami, and Sannai

Our key insight is that security auditing becomes both more effective and more analyzable when vulnerabilities are represented as violations of explicit security properties derived from specifica-tions, rather than as repository-local code bug patterns. We derive security properties—invariants, preconditions, postconditions, and assumptions—from natural-language specifications and threat mod-els, then systematically check whether implementations satisfy them through structured proof-attempt auditing. This representa-tion grounds each finding in a traceable security expectation and, crucially, makes false positives more interpretable: in our analysis, all confirmed false positives trace to three recurring root causes— trust boundary misunderstanding, code reading errors, and spec-ification misinterpretation—each traceable to a specific pipeline phase rather than arising from opaque model predictions. We implement this approach in SPECA, a specification-anchored security audit framework that combines automated property deriva-tion with expert augmentation, and evaluate it on two established benchmarks. On the Sherlock benchmark—10 implementations of the same protocol specification, reviewed by 366 professional auditors—our main results are as follows: (1) Expert-augmented recall : SPECA recovers all 15 in-scope H/M/L vulnerabilities (5 High, 2 Medium, 8 Low) and in-dependently discovers 4 additional bugs confirmed by de-veloper fix commits—including a cryptographic invariant violation absent from all 366 adjudicated contest submis-sions. (2) Automated-only baseline : The fully automated pipeline (Phases 1–6 without manual property injection) recovers 8 of 15 issues. The gap identifies cryptographic invariants and protocol-lifecycle rules as the concrete frontier for auto-mated property generation. (3) Cluster-level precision : When multiple findings targeting the same root cause are grouped into a single cluster, strict precision rises from 26.4% (finding-level) to 48.7% (cluster-level), reflecting a property neighborhood effect where com-plementary properties jointly characterize each issue. On the RepoAudit C/C++ benchmark (15 projects, 35 non-disputed ground-truth bugs), SPECA identifies 12 author-validated candidate bugs beyond the established ground truth at 88.9% precision (Son-net 4.5); an intermediate model (Sonnet 4) discovers 18 candidates at 81.2% precision, and a partially controlled same-backbone com-parison (DeepSeek R1) discovers 7 at 72.7%. The non-monotonic relationship between model capability and discovery count reveals a property adherence effect : more capable models audit more faith-fully within the stated property scope, reducing false positives but also reducing serendipitous beyond-property discoveries—making property generation quality the binding constraint on detection cov-erage as models improve. Detailed analysis of 16 representative false positives reveals that they trace to three recurring root causes—trust boundary misunderstanding (50%), code reading errors (37.5%), and specification misinterpretation (12.5%)—each traceable to a specific pipeline phase. SPECA should be understood not primarily as a cheaper bug-finding tool, but as a specification-anchored audit framework—combining automated property derivation with expert augmentation—that makes both detections and failures more analyzable. Its value lies not only in what it finds, but in the structured account of why it finds—or fails to find—each issue. In summary, this paper makes the following contributions: 

• We present the design of SPECA, a property-centered secu-rity auditing framework that derives explicit security prop-erties from natural-language specifications and uses them to drive structured proof-attempt auditing of implementations. In its expert-augmented configuration, SPECA recovers all 15 in-scope H/M/L vulnerabilities on the Sherlock bench-mark (automated-only: 8/15) and independently discovers 4 bugs confirmed by developer fix commits. On the RepoAudit benchmark, SPECA identifies 7–18 author-validated candi-date bugs beyond the established ground truth across three model configurations, while matching the best baseline pre-cision with a sufficiently capable model. A multi-model anal-ysis reveals that more capable models audit more faithfully against stated properties, identifying property generation as the binding constraint on coverage (§3, §4). 

• We demonstrate that SPECA’s false positives trace to three interpretable root causes, each traceable to a specific pipeline phase, yielding ranked, actionable improvement targets. We report precision at three granularities—strict H/M/L-match (26.4%), confirmed-useful (59.7%), and broad security-relevance (66.7%)—enabling readers to assess effectiveness under different interpretations of true positives (§4, §5). 

• We show that holding a shared property vocabulary constant across implementations enables controlled cross-implementation security comparison, revealing where specification-implementation alignment systematically diverges across 10 client implementations (§4, §5). 

• We provide a systematic property-type ablation, document the empirical evolution from a 5-gate to a 3-gate severity-preserving review filter, and quantify the gap between auto-mated and expert-augmented property generation, establish-ing design principles for recall-first security analysis systems (§4, §5). 

## 2 Related Work 

We organize related work along three axes and summarize the closest systems in Table 1. Appendix A provides a full discussion; here we highlight what distinguishes SPECA. 

LLM-augmented code-level detection combines LLM reason-ing with program analysis to improve code-driven bug detection. LLift [ 10 ] and BugLens [ 11 ] guide LLMs through structured rea-soning for kernel use-before-initialization and taint-style bugs; IRIS [ 12 ] and LLMxCPG [ 9] combine LLMs with CodeQL or code property graphs; and RepoAudit [ 6 ] deploys an autonomous repository-level agent. These systems all start from repository-local information: dataflow, code property graphs, or path constraints. When correctness depends on normative requirements that the code never explicitly encodes, code-level starting points cannot express whether an implementation satisfies its intended security expectation [5, 19]. 

LLM-driven property generation uses language models to synthesize formal properties for verification. PropertyGPT [ 13 ]Beyond Code Reasoning: A Specification-Anchored Audit Framework for Expert-Augmented Security Verification CCS ’26, November 15–19, 2026, The Hague, The Netherlands 

Table 1: Comparative summary of approaches closest to SPECA. SPECA’s primary differentiators are the combina-tion of explicit property grounding, cross-implementation comparability, and structured false-positive analysis.                 

> Axis Repo-Audit Property-GPT RFCAudit SPECA
> Source of expectations Code paths Code + properties RFC NL NL spec + threat models Unit of reasoning Bug pattern Formal property RFC clause Typed property (inv/pre/post/asm) Cross-impl. comparability No No No Yes Structured FP taxonomy No No No Yes (3 causes, phase-origin)

(NDSS’25 Distinguished Paper), GPTScan [ 18 ], and iAudit [ 14 ] tar-get smart contracts; FormalBench [ 8] benchmarks LLMs’ ability to infer formal specifications, finding that multi-phase pipelines with structured review are necessary for reliable inference. These approaches share SPECA’s emphasis on explicit properties as the unit of analysis, but derive them primarily from code or existing properties rather than authoritative natural-language specifications, and focus predominantly on smart contracts. 

Specification-driven analysis derives security expectations from specifications. RFCAudit [ 21 ] audits protocol implementations against RFCs with a hierarchical code-indexing agent; EDEFuzz [ 17 ]fuzzes web APIs using API specifications; Jin et al. [ 7 ] directly study LLMs verifying code against natural-language specifications and find that complex prompting paradoxically increases false-negative rates due to overcorrection bias—a result that motivates SPECA’s structured pipeline with recall-first filtering. Work in formal verifi-cation further shows that even ideal specifications [ 2] can fail to capture intuitively expected security properties. RFCAudit is closest in spirit to SPECA but uses implicit RFC compliance as the unit of reasoning, whereas SPECA derives explicit, typed security proper-ties (invariants, preconditions, postconditions, assumptions) and provides cross-implementation comparison under a shared prop-erty vocabulary plus a structured false-positive taxonomy traced to pipeline-phase origins. Related property-enforcement work [ 4, 15 ]and studies of specification–implementation gaps in blockchain sys-tems [ 20 ] further situate specification-based analysis as an active research area that SPECA extends from enforcement to auditing. 

## 3 SPECA Framework Design 3.1 Overview 

SPECA automates the workflow of a specification-aware security auditor through a six-phase pipeline organized into two stages: 

knowledge structuring (Phases 1–3), which transforms natural-language specifications into explicit security properties, and system-atic auditing (Phases 4–6), which applies structured proof-attempt reasoning to check whether implementations satisfy those proper-ties. Figure 1 illustrates the end-to-end pipeline. At a high level, SPECA first builds a structured representation of what the code 

should do—derived from specifications and threat models—and then systematically checks whether the code actually does it through proof construction. By grounding every finding in a traceable se-curity property, SPECA makes both its detections and its false positives interpretable. The workflow proceeds in six phases: (1) Specification Discovery (Phase 1): Crawl specification doc-uments and produce a structured index. (2) Subgraph Extraction (Phase 2): Decompose each specifica-tion into program graphs with invariant annotations derived from RFC 2119 modal verbs, following Nielson and Niel-son [16]. (3) Property Generation (Phase 3): Apply STRIDE threat mod-eling with CWE Top 25 augmentation to derive typed secu-rity properties (Table 3) from subgraphs and the bug bounty scope. (4) Code Pre-resolution (Phase 4): Link each property to con-crete source locations using Tree-sitter symbol analysis, re-ducing downstream audit tokens by 40–60%. (5) Property-Grounded Audit (Phase 5): For each property, attempt to construct a structured proof that it holds; gaps constitute findings. (6) Severity-Preserving Review (Phase 6): Filter false positives through three narrow mechanical gates (dead code, trust boundary, scope) designed to preserve H/M/L recall. In multi-implementation settings, Phases 1–3 execute once against the specification, producing a shared property vocabulary; Phases 4–6 then execute independently for each target implemen-tation, enabling controlled cross-implementation comparison by holding security expectations constant while varying the code un-der audit. 

## 3.2 Threat Model and Property Vocabulary 

SPECA targets implementation-level vulnerabilities in specification-governed software that could lead to correctness failures, denial of service, information disclosure, or privilege escalation. Specifi-cations themselves and the bug-bounty scope document (which defines trust boundaries and severity thresholds) are trusted ; inter-component communication channels are semi-trusted (may carry malformed but protocol-compliant data); and external user inputs are untrusted . Table 2 summarizes the trust-boundary model used throughout the audit pipeline. SPECA does not target specification-level flaws, hardware attacks, or vulnerabilities that require dy-namic execution to observe (e.g., race conditions). We assume: (1) specifications are available in machine-readable form (e.g., Markdown, HTML) with normative requirements expressed us-ing RFC 2119 modal verbs; (2) source code of the target imple-mentation is accessible for static analysis; and (3) a bug-bounty scope document or equivalent defines the audit perimeter and trust boundaries. Phase 3 synthesizes each property from six sources—STRIDE threats, trust-boundary obligations, specification assumptions, subgraph invariants ( INV-* ), state transitions, and optimization-correctness constraints—and assigns one of four types. Table 3 summarizes the vocabulary. CCS ’26, November 15–19, 2026, The Hague, The Netherlands Kamba, Murakami, and Sannai 

Figure 1: The SPECA pipeline. Phases 1–3 ( Knowledge Structuring ) derive security properties from specifications; Phases 4–6 (Systematic Auditing ) verify properties against implementations. In multi-implementation settings, the left stage executes once and the right stage executes per target. Table 2: Trust boundary model used throughout the audit pipeline. Each boundary is mapped to a trust level that Phase 6’s trust-boundary gate checks against attack-path sources.           

> Boundary Trust Level Rationale
> Specification documents TRUSTED Correctness oracle Bug bounty scope TRUSTED Defines audit perimeter Internal component APIs SEMI_TRUSTED Malformed but valid data External/user-facing inputs UNTRUSTED Attacker-controlled

Table 3: The four property types in SPECA’s vocabulary. 

Type Definition Example 

Invariant Holds at all times Nodes maintain ≥

CUSTODY_REQUIREMENT 

columns Precondition Holds before an operation Input length equals commitment count before verification Postcondition Holds after operation completes New custody set covers required subnets after rotation Assumption Assumed but not enforced by component Execution layer returns valid block data via Engine API 

## 3.3 Property-Grounded Audit (Phase 5) 

Phase 5 is the core reasoning phase. For each property, the auditor attempts to construct a proof that the property holds in the imple-mentation; gaps in the proof constitute findings. Figure 2 shows the per-property audit flow, and Algorithm 1 presents the detailed procedure. Each property is processed in three sub-phases. Map : decompose the property’s assertion into verifiable sub-claims, read the enforce-ment code completely (full function bodies plus callers/callees), and link each sub-claim to the code responsible for satisfying it. 

Prove : verify input coverage, path coverage, concurrency safety, temporal validity, and implementation-pattern obligations (e.g., 

Algorithm 1 Property-Grounded Audit per Property 

Require: Property 𝑃 with assertion 𝐴 , code scope 𝐶 

Ensure: Finding 𝐹 or verification Pass  

> 1:

procedure Audit (𝑃 , 𝐶 ) 

> 2:

sub _claims ← Decompose (𝐴 ) 

> 3:

code _map ← Map (sub _claims , 𝐶 ) ⊲ Sub-phase 1  

> 4:

for each claim 𝑠 in sub _claims do  

> 5:

proof ← Prove (𝑠, code _map [𝑠 ] ) ⊲ Sub-phase 2  

> 6:

if proof .fails then  

> 7:

gap ← proof .failure_point  

> 8:

attack ← StressTest (gap , 𝐶 ) ⊲ Sub-phase 3  

> 9:

if attack .plausible then  

> 10:

return Finding (𝑃 .id, Vuln , gap , attack ) 

> 11:

else  

> 12:

return Finding (𝑃 .id, Potential , gap , ∅) 

> 13:

end if  

> 14:

end if  

> 15:

end for  

> 16:

return Pass  

> 17:

end procedure 

cache keys and deduplication keys computed from complete in-puts); gaps are recorded as findings. Stress-test : challenge the con-clusion by either re-examining every assumption (if the proof suc-ceeded) or attempting to construct a concrete attack path (if it failed); findings without a plausible attack path are downgraded to 

potential-vulnerability . We use “proof attempt” to be precise: Phase 5 is LLM-driven evidence construction with structured rea-soning steps, not formal verification. The structured proof-attempt framing was chosen over an adversarial “find bugs” framing after preliminary experiments showed the adversarial approach pro-duced an 88% false positive rate: without a structured claim to disprove, the model produced numerous speculative findings with weak grounding, whereas the proof-attempt framing forces the model to commit to a verifiable claim before reporting a gap. 

Worked example. Consider the property “The KZG batch ver-ification challenge must be computed from the deduplicated commitment array.” In Sub-phase 1 (Map), the auditor identifies 

compute_verify_cell_kzg_proof_batch_challenge at line 877 of the target library as the enforcement location. In Sub-phase 2 Beyond Code Reasoning: A Specification-Anchored Audit Framework for Expert-Augmented Security Verification CCS ’26, November 15–19, 2026, The Hague, The Netherlands 

Figure 2: Phase 5 audit flow for a single property. Each property undergoes three sub-phases: Map (decompose assertion into sub-claims), Prove (verify each sub-claim against code), and Stress-Test (validate or challenge the conclusion). 

(Prove), the auditor traces the data flow and discovers that the func-tion receives commitments_bytes (the original array with dupli-cates) rather than unique_commitments (the deduplicated array), breaking the mathematical guarantee of the verification scheme. In Sub-phase 3 (Stress-Test), the auditor confirms that a crafted set of duplicate commitments could cause the challenge hash to differ from the specification’s expectation, enabling a proof to pass verifi-cation incorrectly. The result is classified as a vulnerability with severity High—a cryptographic correctness bug that 366 human auditors in a concurrent security contest did not detect (§4.3). 

## 3.4 Severity-Preserving Review (Phase 6) 

Security auditing faces an asymmetric risk: a missed H/M/L true positive is costlier than a false positive that requires triage time. SPECA’s review phase therefore prioritizes severity preservation : it may only dispute findings through three narrow, mechanical gates designed to be recall-safe for H/M/L findings. 

Gate 1: Dead Code. If a flagged function has zero non-test callers (and is not part of a public API), the finding is classified as DISPUTED_FP .

Gate 2: Trust Boundary. If the attack path’s data source is clas-sified as TRUSTED or SEMI_TRUSTED in the scope document and no alternative untrusted input path exists, the finding is classified as 

DISPUTED_FP .

Gate 3: Scope Check. Findings targeting scope-excluded cate-gories, pre-existing issues, or out-of-scope components are classi-fied as DISPUTED_FP .Only these three gates may produce a DISPUTED_FP verdict; no other reasoning about design intent, code quality, or subjective judgment may dispute a finding. The current three-gate design was simplified from a five-gate prototype after two gates (Spec Cross-Reference, Exploitability) were found to cause recall loss on informational true positives while providing negligible precision improvement (§4.3; Appendix C.6). Surviving findings then receive severity calibration against the scope document’s impact-based classification thresholds. 

## 3.5 Cross-Implementation Audit Workflow 

When auditing multiple implementations of the same specification, Phases 1–3 execute once, producing a shared property vocabulary, and Phases 4–6 execute independently per implementation. This holds security expectations constant while varying the code un-der test, producing a controlled comparison: the same property vocabulary yields systematically different distributions of true posi-tives, false positives, and disputes across implementations, revealing where specification–implementation alignment diverges. Appen-dix B.3 details the implementation (orchestration, fault tolerance, token budgeting, models, and tool usage). 

## 4 Evaluation 4.1 Research Questions 

RQ1: How effective is SPECA at auditing specification-governed implementations, and what explains its successes and failures? This question evaluates SPECA’s core contributions on a large-scale, multi-implementation benchmark derived from a professional security contest. We measure both detection effective-ness (recall, precision) and the structure of successes and failures— requiring that both be traceable to specific pipeline mechanisms. 

RQ2: How does SPECA compare to code-driven auditing ap-proaches, and does the property-centered representation pro-duce qualitatively different outcomes? We compare SPECA against published code-driven baselines on an independent bench-mark and test whether specification-grounded representation yields distinctive outcomes: (i) discovery of bugs beyond the established ground truth, and (ii) qualitatively different security judgments on disputed patterns. 

## 4.2 Experimental Setup 

RQ1 benchmark (Sherlock). We evaluate SPECA on the Sherlock Ethereum Fusaka Audit Contest, a professional security competition targeting 10 production Ethereum client implementations of EIP-7594 (PeerDAS) and EIP-7691. The contest received 366 submissions from professional auditors, of which 15 were judged valid at High, Medium, or Low severity (5 H, 2 M, 8 L). The 10 targets span five programming languages (Go, Rust, Nim, TypeScript, C) and range from full consensus-layer clients (Lighthouse, Prysm, Grandine, Nimbus, Lodestar, Nethermind) to cryptographic libraries (c-kzg-4844, rust-eth-kzg) and execution-layer components (Reth, Alloy EVM). This setting provides ecological validity: the ground truth is established by independent expert adjudication in a real security CCS ’26, November 15–19, 2026, The Hague, The Netherlands Kamba, Murakami, and Sannai 

Table 4: Sherlock Ethereum Fusaka Audit Contest benchmark characteristics.       

> Characteristic Value
> Target implementations 10 Programming languages Go, Rust, Nim, TypeScript, C Contest submissions 366 Valid issues (H/M/L) 15 (5 High, 2 Medium, 8 Low) Severity thresholds Network-impact-based

Table 5: Finding label definitions. Precision = non-FP rate: all labels except fp_invalid and fp_review count as non-FP. *potential-info findings are plausible security observations below the threshold for confirmed vulnerability.                 

> Label Definition TP?
> tp Matches valid H/M/L contest issue Yes
> tp_info Informational-severity or real low-severity Yes
> fixed Independently fixed on target repository Yes
> partially_fixed Partially addressed Yes
> potential-info Plausible but unconfirmed Yes*
> fp_invalid False positive (invalid reasoning) No
> fp_review False positive (review-gate error) No

engagement, not synthetic bug injection. Direct comparison with individual contest participants is precluded by confidentiality; we therefore evaluate in absolute terms against the expert-adjudicated ground truth and reserve head-to-head baseline comparison for RQ2. 

RQ2 benchmark (RepoAudit). We evaluate on the RepoAu-dit benchmark [ 6]: 15 open-source C/C++ projects with 35 non-disputed ground-truth bugs (null-pointer dereferences, memory leaks, and use-after-free) confirmed by developer fixes, plus 5 dis-puted bugs. We compare against published baseline numbers from Guo et al. [ 6 ] (four RepoAudit model configurations) and two in-dustrial static analyzers (Meta Infer, Amazon CodeGuru). We do not report recall comparatively because the ground truth was con-structed from RepoAudit’s own discoveries, making recall compari-son structurally unfair. 

Metrics. We report precision (non-false-positive rate), recall on the H/M/L contest issues, and a strict H/M/L-match rate. Issue match-ing uses LLM-assisted semantic matching followed by two-author manual verification (initial agreement 93%, disagreements resolved by consensus). A match is accepted only when both the root cause (the specific code-level deficiency) and the security impact (the con-sequence for system security) align between the SPECA finding and the ground-truth issue; partial matches—where a SPECA finding identifies the same code location but attributes a different security impact—are recorded separately and excluded from recall. Many-to-one matches (multiple SPECA findings to one issue) are handled by counting the issue as recovered if at least one finding matches, while each finding is counted independently for precision. Each finding is labeled as true positive ( tp , tp_info , fixed , partially_fixed ,

potential-info ) or false positive ( fp_invalid , fp_review ); Ta-ble 5 lists the full label definitions. 

Table 6: SPECA detection effectiveness on the Sherlock bench-mark. The gap between strict precision (26.4%) and broad precision (66.7%) is explained by the property neighborhood effect (one issue detected by multiple complementary prop-erties) and by informational-severity/independently-fixed findings outside the contest’s severity-gated scope.           

> Metric Value
> Total findings (Phase 5, pre-review) 102 Total findings (Phase 6, post-review) 72 Confirmed FPs (post-review) 24 (33.3%) H/M/L recovered (expert-augmented) 15 / 15 (100%) H/M/L recovered (automated-only) 8 / 15 (53%) Novel bugs confirmed by fix commits 4
> Precision at three granularities (post-review, N=72):
> Strict (H/M/L match) 26.4% (19/72) Confirmed-useful 59.7% (43/72) Broad (non-FP rate) 66.7% (48/72)

We report precision at three granularities (strict H/M/L match, confirmed-useful, and broad non-FP rate) to enable readers to as-sess SPECA’s effectiveness under different interpretations of true positives. 

Implementation and cost. SPECA is implemented in Python with an asynchronous orchestration framework. Phases 1–3 use Claude Opus for specification understanding; Phases 4–6 use Claude Son-net for code analysis and review. Total API cost was approximately $400–620 for RQ1 and $81.05 ($1.69/bug) for the RQ2 primary con-figuration (Sonnet 4.5); a multi-model sensitivity analysis (Sonnet 4, DeepSeek R1) yielded $93–101 total per model. We release evalua-tion scripts, per-repository outputs, and all generated artifacts as supplementary material (Open Science, p. 13). 

## 4.3 RQ1: Effectiveness and Structured Failure Analysis 

4.3.1 Detection Effectiveness. Phase 5 produces 647 audit outputs; 545 are classified as not-a-vulnerability or out-of-scope, leaving 102 positive findings. Phase 6 filters 30 as DISPUTED_FP , yielding 72 post-review findings. Table 6 presents the headline detection results; Table 15 (Appendix C.2) provides a full accounting reconciliation. In the expert-augmented configuration, SPECA recovers all 15 in-scope H/M/L vulnerabilities across all severity levels (5 High, 2 Medium, 8 Low). Phase 6 review improves broad precision from 56.9% to 66.7% while preserving recall on all H/M/L true positives; the 10 true-positive findings filtered by Phase 6 are 8 

tp_info , 1 partially_fixed , and 1 potential-info , confirming the severity-preserving design principle: the mechanical gates are conservative enough to protect high-severity findings, at the price of limited recall loss on informational severity—an acceptable trade-off for security auditing. Figure 3 visualizes the Phase 5 vs Phase 6 metric transition, making the precision-recall tradeoff explicit: pre-cision rises from 56.9% to 66.7% while recall on H/M/L findings is preserved at 100%, raising F1 from 72.5% to 80.0%. Beyond Code Reasoning: A Specification-Anchored Audit Framework for Expert-Augmented Security Verification CCS ’26, November 15–19, 2026, The Hague, The Netherlands 

Figure 3: Phase 5 (Audit) vs Phase 6 (FP Filter). Phase 6 im-proves precision from 56.9% to 66.7% while preserving 100% recall on H/M/L findings, raising F1 from 72.5% to 80.0%. Table 7: Finding-level vs cluster-level evaluation. Cluster-level strict precision (48.7%) nearly doubles the finding-level rate (26.4%), confirming that the property neighborhood pro-vides genuine redundancy rather than alert duplication.       

> Level Precision (broad / strict) Recall
> Finding-level (N=72) 66.7% / 26.4% 15/15 (100%) Cluster-level (N=39) — / 48.7% 15/15 (100%)

Property neighborhoods explain the strict/broad gap. The strict H/M/L match rate (26.4%) reflects a property neighborhood ef-fect : many issues are recovered not by a single alert but by multiple complementary properties that together characterize the root cause. The deep analysis identifies 11 issues matched by 2 or more proper-ties (e.g., issues #308 and #331 each matched by 4 properties; issue #169 by 3). To distinguish genuine redundancy from simple alert duplication, we additionally report cluster-level metrics (Table 7) where all findings matching the same contest issue are grouped into a single cluster. The cluster-level strict precision (48.7%) better reflects the triage burden on a human reviewer: 15 true issues are carried by 19 H/M/L-matching clusters rather than 72 individual alerts. This many-to-one structure also explains SPECA’s high recall—even if individual properties have moderate precision, the probability of at least one property in the neighborhood matching the root cause is high. Figure 4 visualizes the distribution of findings per issue: a small number of contest issues attract 3–4 complementary properties while the long tail consists of issues recovered by a single property. SPECA also independently discovered 4 bugs confirmed by devel-oper fix commits—bugs absent from all 366 adjudicated contest sub-missions: (A) a cryptographic correctness bug in c-kzg-4844 where the KZG batch-verification challenge is computed from the original, rather than the deduplicated, commitment array (fix: f18ba082 ); (B) an inverted logic error plus missing validation in Lodestar (fix: 

3b98c59c ); (C) an unchecked array access in Nimbus reachable from RPC and Engine API (fix: b3a3f3f9 ); and (D) a wrong subnet parameter computation plus missing cell-count validation in Prysm 

Figure 4: Findings per issue: the property neighborhood ef-fect. Eleven of 15 matched issues are covered by two or more complementary properties, explaining both the high recall and the gap between finding-level and cluster-level precision. 

Figure 5: Property family to ground truth issue flow. The horizontal density around a handful of issues visualizes the property neighborhood effect. 

(fix: b5bdd65f ). Bug A is particularly significant: a cryptographic correctness bug in a core library used by multiple Ethereum clients. We note that this comparison is not fully controlled: SPECA had structured specification access and substantial compute budget, while contest participants operated under time constraints and different incentive structures. 

4.3.2 Cross-Implementation Patterns. Because SPECA applies a shared property vocabulary across all 10 implementations, we can analyze where the same security expectations produce different outcomes. Eleven issues recur across multiple repositories under CCS ’26, November 15–19, 2026, The Hague, The Netherlands Kamba, Murakami, and Sannai 

Figure 6: Per-repository finding distribution (Phase 5 vs Phase 6). 

the same property vocabulary (e.g., issue #308 in Grandine, Light-house, Nimbus, and Prysm; issue #169 in Grandine, Lodestar, and Prysm). As a case study, property PROP-6a4369e9-inv-014 asserts that blob parameters at fork boundaries must be computed from the specification’s canonical schedule rather than local configuration defaults. Under the shared property vocabulary, this single property produces divergent outcomes: Grandine, Lighthouse, and Prysm use a local config default that diverges at fork epochs (all three TP, matched to contest issue #11), while Nimbus correctly reads the canonical schedule and the property passes. A single property thus functions simultaneously as a true-positive detector in deviating implementations and as a conformance certificate in compliant ones—a controlled comparison that code-local tools cannot achieve because they lack a shared vocabulary across implementations. Figure 13 (Appendix C.4) visualizes the resulting issue ×property TP distribution across the 10 clients, exposing the shared detec-tion structure that code-local tools cannot produce. Appendix C.4 provides further breakdowns. 

4.3.3 Automated-Only vs. Expert-Augmented Configurations. Of the 15 detecting properties, 8 were auto-generated by Phases 1–3 and 7 required manual property creation. The 7 manual proper-ties cluster in two domain-specific areas—cryptographic invariants (KZG polynomial commitment edge cases, BLS12-381 identity ele-ment handling) and protocol lifecycle rules (custody group bounds, cache key completeness, fork-transition metadata refresh)—that require mathematical domain knowledge or multi-specification cross-referencing not yet reliably automated. Table 8 reports both configurations. 

Table 8: Automated-only vs. expert-augmented configura-tions. The 7 manual properties required for full coverage amortize across all 10 implementations: each manually cre-ated property is reused to audit every in-scope client, turning expert knowledge injection into a one-time cost per specifi-cation corpus.          

> Config Properties H/M/L Cov.
> Automated-only Auto (Phases 1–3) 8 / 15 53% Expert-augmented Auto + 7 manual 15 / 15 100%

Table 9: False-positive root causes with phase origin (N=16 deeply analyzed from a population of 44 total FPs). Each root cause maps to a specific pipeline phase and to a concrete, implementable improvement.               

> Root Cause Phase Origin N%
> Trust boundary misunderstanding Phase 3 850.0 Code reading error Phase 5 637.5 Specification misinterpretation Phase 3 212.5
> Total 16 100

The current evidence supports characterizing SPECA as a 

specification-anchored audit framework with expert aug-mentation , not a fully automated pipeline. However, manual prop-erty creation does not undermine the contribution but changes its interpretation: the framework’s value lies in the property-centered representation, the structured proof-attempt audit pipeline, and the severity-preserving review filter—each of which is fully automated and property-source-agnostic. A manually created property passes through the same pipeline as an auto-generated one. Crucially, the 7 manual properties are authored once per specification corpus and then reused across all 10 implementations : expert knowledge injection has high leverage in multi-implementation settings, where each manually encoded invariant amortizes across every client it audits. Improving automated extraction to cover cryptographic and protocol-lifecycle properties is a concrete research frontier (Appendix C.8). 

4.3.4 Structured False-Positive Analysis. SPECA produces 44 total FPs across both phases (24 surviving Phase 6, 20 correctly filtered). To identify root causes, we selected 16 FPs for detailed pipeline tracing—8 from post-review and 8 from filtered—and classified each by root cause. All 16 trace to three identifiable pipeline limitations (Table 9). 

Trust boundary misunderstanding (50%): Phase 3 lacks explicit trust boundary modeling, causing Phase 5 to treat trusted inter-component communication (e.g., the consensus-layer/execution-layer boundary secured by JWT authentication) as untrusted exter-nal input. Code reading error (37.5%): Phase 5 misreads implemen-tation logic—e.g., confusing a bounds check with a missing check, or misinterpreting conditional control flow. Specification misinter-pretation (12.5%): Phase 3 generates properties from ambiguous specification language that the protocol team interprets differently than the literal text suggests. Each root cause maps to a concrete, implementable improvement: explicit trust boundary configuration, Beyond Code Reasoning: A Specification-Anchored Audit Framework for Expert-Augmented Security Verification CCS ’26, November 15–19, 2026, The Hague, The Netherlands 

Table 10: Property-type ablation (analysis subset, N=88). The subset comprises 31 H/M/L-labeled findings, 7 supplementary FPs for cross-type analysis, and 50 non-H/M/L findings for coverage.                     

> Property Type NTP FP Precision
> Invariant 67 18 675.0% Precondition 11 40100.0% Postcondition 51150.0% Assumption 5010.0%

richer code reading context, and enforced spec-section re-reading before classification. The phase-6 gate filtered half of the trust-boundary FPs and two-thirds of the code-reading FPs, but none of the specification-misinterpretation FPs, because the mechanical gates cannot resolve semantic ambiguity. Appendix C.5 provides per-category example traces, pipeline-phase origin counts over the full FP population (N=44), and the Phase 6 gate breakdown. 

Property-type ablation. Beyond root causes, we ablate precision by the four property types to identify which parts of the vocabulary currently drive detection effectiveness (Table 10). The ablation sub-set (N=88) comprises 31 H/M/L-labeled findings, 7 supplementary FPs for cross-type analysis, and 50 non-H/M/L findings. Invariant-type properties account for 76% of findings and achieve 75% pre-cision; precondition properties achieve 100% precision on a small sample; postcondition precision is moderate (50%); and assumption-type properties are too noisy for reliable auditing (0% precision) and are best treated as an exploratory mode. Excluding assumption properties yields essentially unchanged precision (67.1%) and recall (27.1% strict), confirming that assumptions contribute negligibly to detection today. The ablation identifies postcondition and assump-tion generation as the concrete research frontiers for improving the automated-only configuration. 

Phase 6 verdict breakdown. Table 11 shows the distribution of Phase 6 verdicts over the 102 pre-review findings and their retro-spectively validated TP rates. The DISPUTED_FP verdict achieves 66.7% precision as a filter (33.3% TP rate on filtered items), validat-ing the severity-preserving design principle: mechanical gates are conservative enough to protect most H/M/L true positives while still eliminating roughly two-thirds of the false positives they flag. The current three-gate system was simplified from an earlier five-gate design that additionally included Spec Cross-Reference and Exploitability gates; both were removed after empirical analysis showed they filtered informational true positives at a precision of 0%, providing no net benefit (Appendix C.6). Figure 7 visualizes the per-gate filtering effectiveness of the final three-gate design over the 30 DISPUTED_FP findings. 

4.3.5 Specification Contribution. A natural question is whether SPECA’s detections truly depend on specification-derived informa-tion, or whether equivalent properties could have been synthesized from code alone. To test this, we retrospectively classified each of the 15 detecting properties as spec-essential (encodes information available only from the specification) or code-inferrable (could be generated from code patterns alone), and traced every such property back through the pipeline chain to its specification source. Table 12 

Figure 7: Phase 6 three-gate FP filter effectiveness (N=30 DIS-PUTED_FP). The three retained gates each target a narrow, mechanically verifiable condition, preserving H/M/L recall while filtering roughly two-thirds of flagged false positives. Table 11: Phase 6 verdict distribution and retrospective TP rate (N=102). DISPUTED_FP ’s 33.3% TP rate means the filter achieves 66.7% precision as a false-positive detector while incurring limited recall loss on informational findings.                   

> Verdict Count TP TP Rate
> CONFIRMED_VULNERABILITY 39 29 74.4% CONFIRMED_POTENTIAL 24 13 54.2% DOWNGRADED 8562.5% DISPUTED_FP 30 10 33.3% NEEDS_MANUAL_REVIEW 11100.0%

Table 12: Retrospective spec-essentiality classification of all 15 matched issues. All 15 were judged spec-essential; 0 were judged code-inferrable. This is a retrospective authors’ as-sessment.           

> Category Issues Count
> Spec-defined algorithm #40, #176, #210, #308, #319 5Mathematical invariant #48, #203 2Cross-field constraint #190, #343, #371, #376, #381 5Protocol parameter #15, #109, #216 3

summarizes the result: all 15 detecting properties are spec-essential and fall into four recurring patterns. The categories illustrate why code-local analysis cannot synthe-size these properties. Issue #40 involves a function that recomputes the proposer index correctly by the original algorithm—code in-spection reveals no defect—but the Fulu specification redefines the function to use a cached lookahead array; the “bug” is that the implementation does not match the new specification. Issue #48 in-volves a KZG commitment equal to the BLS12-381 identity element, which passes group-membership checks but violates a mathematical invariant of the polynomial commitment scheme that only the spec-ification defines. Issue #376 involves two fields ( prev_randao and CCS ’26, November 15–19, 2026, The Hague, The Netherlands Kamba, Murakami, and Sannai 

Figure 8: Tool precision on the RepoAudit benchmark. SPECA (Sonnet 4.5) matches the best RepoAudit configuration (88.9%) while also surfacing 12 author-validated candidate bugs be-yond the established ground truth. 

Figure 9: True positives vs false positives across all tools. 

randao_mix ) that are individually correct but must be equal accord-ing to the specification’s process_execution_payload definition— a cross-field constraint that no single function’s local code reveals. For each detecting property we also traced the full provenance chain (property → subgraph → specification section → INV-* label); all 15 trace to specification sources, and 2 of 15 terminate at a spe-cific INV label (e.g., issue #319 traces through subgraph SG-001 for 

get_blob_parameters to INV-004 : “if no schedule entry matches, defaults to ELECTRA parameters”). This analysis supports charac-terizing SPECA’s detection gains as representation-induced rather than model-capability-induced. 

## 4.4 RQ2: Comparison Against Code-Driven Baselines 

We run SPECA on the 15 C/C++ projects from the RepoAudit bench-mark using the same pipeline as RQ1. Table 13 presents the com-parison, organized into a partially controlled comparison with the same LLM backbone (DeepSeek R1), SPECA’s best configuration, and other model configurations for context. 

Matched-backbone comparison. Under a partially controlled comparison using DeepSeek R1 (agent architecture, retrieval/search policy, and validator design still differ), SPECA reports 7 author-validated candidate bugs beyond the established ground truth while 

Figure 10: Partially controlled comparison across model back-bones. Left: same-backbone comparison (DeepSeek R1) iso-lates the representation effect under matched model capabil-ity. Right: latest-models comparison shows SPECA match-ing the best baseline precision while uniquely contributing beyond-GT candidates. 

RepoAudit achieves higher precision (87.2% vs. 72.7%). This is con-sistent with a representation effect—specification-grounded prop-erties can surface different findings than code-driven patterns— but does not isolate representation as the only causal factor. With a more capable model (Sonnet 4.5), SPECA’s precision improves to 88.9% (matching the best RepoAudit configuration) while dis-covering 12 author-validated candidate bugs beyond the ground truth; the intermediate model (Sonnet 4) discovers 18 candidates at 81.2% precision, reflecting the property-adherence effect discussed below. Figure 10 visualizes both the same-backbone comparison (DeepSeek R1) and the latest-models cross-backbone comparison, making the representation-effect argument structure explicit. 

Divergent security judgments. SPECA and RepoAudit produce qualitatively different security judgments on 5 disputed patterns, reflecting a methodological difference in how each tool defines security relevance. SPECA applies an exploitability-centered inter-pretation, classifying a code pattern as a vulnerability only when a concrete attack path exists. RepoAudit applies a code-quality-centered interpretation, flagging patterns that violate best practices regardless of exploitability. For example, RA-M2-O1 (memcached 

server_sockets leak) has no exploitable impact because both call sites immediately invoke exit() —SPECA classifies this as not-a-vulnerability while RepoAudit flags it as a memory leak. We report these as divergent security judgments rather than claiming either tool is definitively correct; the distinction is methodological, not technical. Notably, this judgment is model-dependent: DeepSeek R1 rejects all 5 disputed patterns, while Sonnet 4 detects 4 of 5. This sensitivity has a principled explanation: an exploitability-centered classification requires the model to reason counterfactually about attacker capabilities and reachable program states, which is pre-cisely the kind of multi-step reasoning where larger models show the strongest improvements. The takeaway is not that SPECA is “correct” on disputed patterns, but that a specification-grounded pipeline surfaces the methodological disagreement explicitly as a property-level verdict, making it available for human adjudication rather than absorbed into an opaque bug-versus-no-bug label. 

Beyond-GT candidates. Across all model configurations, SPECA discovers author-validated candidate bugs beyond the established ground truth (7–18 candidates). We classify validation evidence Beyond Code Reasoning: A Specification-Anchored Audit Framework for Expert-Augmented Security Verification CCS ’26, November 15–19, 2026, The Hague, The Netherlands 

Table 13: Comparison on the RepoAudit benchmark. TP numbers for RepoAudit are published by Guo et al. and include both GT-matched bugs and additional discoveries. For SPECA, we omit an aggregate TP count because computing it requires estimating GT matches—an inherently approximate procedure. Recall is not reported because the GT was constructed from RepoAudit’s own discoveries. 𝑏 New candidates = author-validated bugs beyond the established GT (Level D validation, see Appendix D).                                                   

> Method TP FP Precision New cand. 𝑏 Cost
> Partially controlled comparison (DeepSeek R1)
> RepoAudit (DeepSeek R1) 41 687.2% (in TP) $8.55 SPECA (DeepSeek R1) —15 72.7% 7$93.51
> Latest models
> RepoAudit (Claude 3.7 Sonnet) 40 588.9% (in TP) $23.85
> SPECA (Sonnet 4.5) —688.9% 12 $81.05
> Other configurations
> Amazon CodeGuru 018 0.0% 0—Meta Infer 7277.8% 0free RepoAudit (o3-mini) 36 980.0% (in TP) $4.50 RepoAudit (Claude 3.5 Sonnet) 40 11 78.4% (in TP) $38.10 SPECA (Sonnet 4) —13 81.2% 18 $100.68

into four levels of decreasing strength: (A) an explicit developer fix commit; (B) maintainer acknowledgement; (C) independent reproduction with documented steps; and (D) author analysis only (code inspection without external confirmation). Table 14 lists the 18 candidate bugs from the Sonnet 4 configuration, which has the highest beyond-GT discovery count; two have been externally validated above Level D (one Level A, one Level B). Seven of 18 candidates (39%) are independently corroborated by at least one other model configuration, providing weak but non-trivial cross-model evidence. The candidates span three bug types (use-after-free dominates with 9 findings, followed by memory leaks with 6 and null-pointer dereference with 3) and eleven projects, with the Linux kernel contributing the largest share. 

Property adherence and model capability. An instructive pat-tern emerges from the per-model candidate counts: Sonnet 4 discov-ers 18 beyond-GT candidates (the most across all configurations) while Sonnet 4.5 discovers 12 and DeepSeek R1 discovers 7. The pat-tern is not a simple precision–discovery tradeoff. Rather, it reflects increasing property adherence : more capable models audit more faithfully against the stated property, checking exactly what the specification-derived property asserts and no more. Less capable models are more likely to drift from the property scope during the proof-attempt phase, producing findings that address related but unspecified code patterns—some of which turn out to be genuine bugs (beyond-GT candidates) and others false positives. Notably, 5 of the 6 externally submitted pull requests originate from Son-net 4’s additional discoveries, and 2 of those have been externally confirmed (Level A/B), indicating that property-scope drift can sur-face real issues. This pattern has a concrete engineering implication: as model capability advances and property adherence increases, the quality of property generation (Phases 1–3) becomes the binding constraint on detection coverage—the model will audit precisely what the properties tell it to audit, making comprehensive property derivation the primary lever for improving recall. 

Developer engagement progress. To upgrade validation levels, we submitted 8 pull requests to upstream repositories across all model configurations. Two candidates have been validated above Level D: one coturn null-pointer dereference (PROP-N3-npd-001, detected by both Sonnet 4 and DeepSeek R1) was confirmed at 

Level A —the bug existed in the analyzed commit and was indepen-dently fixed in a later release (PR #1841, self-withdrawn after dis-covering the fix); one ICU use-after-free race condition (PROP-U5-uaf-002, Sonnet 4) was confirmed at Level B —the ICU maintainer approved the corresponding Jira ticket (PR #3921). Two additional PRs were rejected by maintainers, confirming the corresponding findings as false positives (ImageMagick PR #8628: the coder’s 

BlobSupportFlag prevents the NULL path; memcached PR #1282: the refcount guard is correct by design). The remaining 4 PRs are open and awaiting maintainer response. Any candidate whose dis-closure coordination is not complete by the camera-ready deadline will be anonymized. Figure 11 situates SPECA’s cost–precision position relative to baselines: at the Sonnet 4.5 configuration, SPECA achieves the high-est precision (88.9%) while uniquely reporting double-digit beyond-GT candidates, at a per-bug cost ( ∼ $1 .69 /bug) that is competitive with the best published baseline. Appendix D reports full per-model cross-corroboration counts and the remaining RQ2 auxiliary figures (TP/FP, symmetric com-parison, scatter, per-project heatmap). 

## 5 Discussion 

The central finding of our evaluation is that specification-grounded representation changes not just what a tool detects, but what its fail-ures mean . SPECA’s false positives cluster into three interpretable categories traceable to specific pipeline phases, and every root cause maps to a concrete, implementable improvement. 

Model capability, property adherence, and asymmetric secu-rity. RQ2 reveals that SPECA’s pipeline benefits disproportionately from model capability: precision improves from 72.7% (DeepSeek CCS ’26, November 15–19, 2026, The Hague, The Netherlands Kamba, Murakami, and Sannai 

Table 14: Eighteen author-validated candidate bugs identified by SPECA (Sonnet 4) beyond the RepoAudit ground truth. Two candidates have been externally validated above Level D: one at Level A (fix confirmed in later release) and one at Level B (maintainer Jira approval). Cross-model corroboration: 7 of 18 candidates (39%) are detected by at least one other model configuration.                                                                                                                   

> #Property ID Project Type Description Val. Evidence
> 1PROP-M1-mlk-014 libsass MLK Memory leak in CSS AST processing on error path DAuthor review 2PROP-M4-mlk-001 linux/sound MLK Resource leak in audio graph setup on error path DAuthor review 3PROP-M4-mlk-009 linux/sound MLK q6apm_dai_open: graph resource leak on constraints DAuthor review 4PROP-M5-mlk-003 linux/mm MLK DAMON resource leak on reclaim error path DAuthor review 5PROP-M5-mlk-004 linux/mm MLK DAMON target allocation leak on setup failure DAuthor review 6PROP-M5-mlk-007 linux/mm MLK DAMON scheme resource leak on init error DAuthor review 7PROP-N1-npd-003 sofa-pbrpc NPD ResolveAddress: NULL-deref on DNS resolution failure DPR #251 (awaiting) 8PROP-N3-npd-001 coturn NPD allocation_get_new_ch_info: NULL channel-map deref AFix in later release 9PROP-N4-npd-005 libfreenect NPD registration_table: NULL-deref on malloc failure DPR #697 (awaiting) 10 PROP-U1-uaf-004 Redis UAF Use-after-free in benchmark client error path DAuthor review 11 PROP-U2-uaf-004 linux/drivers/peci UAF Use-after-free in PECI driver error path DAuthor review 12 PROP-U2-uaf-007 linux/drivers/peci UAF Use-after-free in PECI auxiliary device cleanup DAuthor review 13 PROP-U3-uaf-002 shadowsocks-libev UAF Use-after-free in server connection teardown DAuthor review 14 PROP-U3-uaf-003 shadowsocks-libev UAF Use-after-free in UDP relay cleanup DAuthor review 15 PROP-U3-uaf-007 shadowsocks-libev UAF Use-after-free in tunnel connection handler DAuthor review 16 PROP-U3-uaf-008 shadowsocks-libev UAF Use-after-free in connection cleanup path DAuthor review 17 PROP-U5-uaf-002 icu/i18n UAF collationroot cleanup: thread-safety race condition BJira approved (PR #3921) 18 PROP-U5-uaf-003 icu/i18n UAF Region cleanupRegionData: double-delete on shutdown DPR #3922 (Jira pending)

Figure 11: Cost vs. detection performance across tools on the RepoAudit benchmark. At the Sonnet 4.5 configuration, SPECA matches the top precision while uniquely contribut-ing author-validated beyond-GT candidates; per-bug cost remains competitive with the best published baseline. 

R1) to 88.9% (Sonnet 4.5), a 16.2 pp gain, compared to a 10.5 pp range across RepoAudit’s configurations (78.4–88.9%). Crucially, this precision gain comes with a structural shift in audit behavior: more capable models adhere more closely to the stated property scope, auditing exactly what the specification-derived property asserts. This increased adherence reduces false positives but si-multaneously reduces beyond-property discoveries (Sonnet 4.5: 12 new candidates, 6 FP; Sonnet 4: 18 new candidates, 13 FP). The implication is that as models improve, property generation quality becomes the dominant factor in detection coverage : the model faith-fully verifies what the properties encode, but will not compensate for properties that the pipeline fails to derive. This makes Phases 1– 3 (specification extraction and property generation) the primary research frontier—a concrete and tractable target, in contrast to the open-ended challenge of improving general code-reasoning capability. More broadly, this highlights a structural asymmetry in LLM-driven security: open-ended bug finding favors the attacker, whereas SPECA transforms LLM capabilities into a defensive asset by grounding the search in explicit, specification-derived properties. By shifting from “finding a bug” to “verifying a property,” the frame-work ensures that advances in model capability support systematic defense rather than merely escalating the attacker’s advantage. 

Limitations. Three caveats bound our claims. (i) Causal attribu-tion: although RQ2 is partially controlled at the model backbone, architecture and retrieval still differ; results are consistent with a representation effect but do not isolate it. (ii) External valida-tion: the 12 Sonnet 4.5 candidate bugs were initially validated at Level D (author review); developer engagement has since upgraded two cross-model candidates to Level A (fix confirmed) and Level B (maintainer Jira approval), while two others were confirmed as false positives by maintainers. (iii) External validity: RQ1 covers Ethereum clients and RQ2 a C/C++ benchmark; broader validation across protocol stacks and cryptographic libraries remains future work. Appendix E discusses additional threats to validity. 

## 6 Conclusion 

We presented SPECA, a specification-anchored audit framework that combines automated property derivation with expert augmen-tation. On the Sherlock benchmark, the expert-augmented configu-ration recovers all 15 H/M/L vulnerabilities (automated-only: 8/15) and discovers 4 additional fix-confirmed bugs; cluster-level preci-sion (48.7%) nearly doubles the finding-level rate. On RepoAudit, SPECA matches the best baseline precision (88.9%) while surfacing Beyond Code Reasoning: A Specification-Anchored Audit Framework for Expert-Augmented Security Verification CCS ’26, November 15–19, 2026, The Hague, The Netherlands 

12 author-validated candidate bugs beyond the ground truth, two confirmed by upstream maintainers. A multi-model analysis reveals that more capable models audit more faithfully within property scope, shifting the detection bottleneck to property generation qual-ity. All false positives trace to three pipeline-specific root causes, turning failures into actionable engineering targets. Improving automated property generation—particularly for cryptographic in-variants and protocol-lifecycle rules—is therefore both the most impactful and most tractable extension of this work. 

## References 

[1] Md Sakib Anwar, Carter Yagemann, and Zhiqiang Lin. 2025. GoSonar: Detecting Logical Vulnerabilities in Memory Safe Language Using Inductive Constraint Reasoning . In 2025 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) . IEEE Computer Society, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 758–773. doi:10.1109/SP61157.2025.00043 [2] Myrto Arapinis, Véronique Cortier, Hubert de Groote, Charlie Jacomme, and Steve Kremer. 2026. Are ideal functionalities really ideal? https://inria.hal.science/hal-05422941 [3] Daniel Arp, Erwin Quiring, Feargus Pendlebury, Alexander Warnecke, Fabio Pierazzi, Christian Wressnegger, Lorenzo Cavallaro, and Konrad Rieck. 2022. Dos and Don’ts of Machine Learning in Computer Security. In 31st USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 22) . USENIX Association, Boston, MA, 3971–3988. https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity22/presentation/arp [4] Yaniv David, Neophytos Christou, Andreas D. Kellas, Vasileios P. Kemerlis, and Junfeng Yang. 2024. QUACK: Hindering Deserialization Attacks via Static Duck Typing. In Proceedings of the 31st Network and Distributed System Security Sym-posium (NDSS) .[5] Yangruibo Ding, Yanjun Fu, Omniyyah Ibrahim, Chawin Sitawarin, Xinyun Chen, Basel Alomair, David Wagner, Baishakhi Ray, and Yizheng Chen. 2025. Vulnerabil-ity Detection with Code Language Models: How Far Are We?. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 47th International Conference on Software Engineering (Ottawa, Ontario, Canada) (ICSE ’25) . IEEE Press, 1729–1741. doi:10.1109/ICSE55347.2025.00038 [6] Jinyao Guo, Chengpeng Wang, Xiangzhe Xu, Zian Su, and Xiangyu Zhang. 2025. RepoAudit: An Autonomous LLM-Agent for Repository-Level Code Auditing. In 

Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning (Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 267) , Aarti Singh, Maryam Fazel, Daniel Hsu, Simon Lacoste-Julien, Felix Berkenkamp, Tegan Maharaj, Kiri Wagstaff, and Jerry Zhu (Eds.). PMLR, 21083–21100. https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/guo25n.html [7] Haolin Jin and Huaming Chen. 2025. Uncovering Systematic Failures of LLMs in Verifying Code Against Natural Language Specifications. In 2025 40th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE) . 3819–3823. doi:10.1109/ASE63991.2025.00323 [8] Thanh Le-Cong, Bach Le, and Toby Murray. 2025. Can LLMs Reason About Program Semantics? A Comprehensive Evaluation of LLMs on Formal Specifica-tion Inference. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , Wanxiang Che, Joyce Nabende, Ekaterina Shutova, and Mohammad Taher Pilehvar (Eds.). Association for Com-putational Linguistics, Vienna, Austria, 21991–22014. doi:10.18653/v1/2025.acl-long.1068 [9] Ahmed Lekssays, Hamza Mouhcine, Khang Tran, Ting Yu, and Issa Khalil. 2025. LLMxCPG: Context-Aware Vulnerability Detection Through Code Property Graph-Guided Large Language Models. In Proceedings of the 34th USENIX Security Symposium . https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity25/presentation/ lekssays [10] Haonan Li, Yu Hao, Yizhuo Zhai, and Zhiyun Qian. 2024. Enhancing Static Analysis for Practical Bug Detection: An LLM-Integrated Approach. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 8, OOPSLA1, Article 111 (April 2024), 26 pages. doi:10.1145/ 3649828 [11] Haonan Li, Hang Zhang, Kexin Pei, and Zhiyun Qian. 2025. Towards More Accurate Static Analysis for Taint-Style Bug Detection in Linux Kernel. In 2025 40th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE) 

(Seoul, Korea, Republic of). IEEE Press, 380–392. doi:10.1109/ASE63991.2025. 00039 [12] Ziyang Li, Saikat Dutta, and Mayur Naik. 2025. IRIS: LLM-Assisted Static Analysis for Detecting Security Vulnerabilities. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations . https://openreview.net/forum?id=9LdJDU7E91 [13] Ye Liu, Yue Xue, Daoyuan Wu, Yuqiang Sun, Yi Li, Miaolei Shi, and Yang Liu. 2025. PropertyGPT: LLM-driven Formal Verification of Smart Contracts through Retrieval-Augmented Property Generation. In Proceedings of the 32nd Network and Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS) . Distinguished Paper Award. [14] Wei Ma, Daoyuan Wu, Yuqiang Sun, Tianwen Wang, Shangqing Liu, Jian Zhang, Yue Xue, and Yang Liu. 2025. Combining Fine-Tuning and LLM-Based Agents for Intuitive Smart Contract Auditing with Justifications. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 47th International Conference on Software Engineering (Ottawa, Ontario, Canada) (ICSE ’25) . IEEE Press, 1742–1754. doi:10.1109/ICSE55347.2025.00027 [15] Marius Momeu, Fabian Kilger, Christopher Roemheld, Simon Schnückel, Sergej Proskurin, Michalis Polychronakis, and Vasileios P. Kemerlis. 2024. ISLAB: Im-mutable Memory Management Metadata for Commodity Operating System Ker-nels. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Asia Conference on Computer and Communica-tions Security (Singapore, Singapore) (ASIA CCS ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1159–1172. doi:10.1145/3634737.3644994 [16] Hanne Riis Nielson and Flemming Nielson. 1992. Semantics with Applications: A Formal Introduction . John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, England. [17] Lianglu Pan, Shaanan Cohney, Toby Murray, and Van-Thuan Pham. 2024. EDE-Fuzz: A Web API Fuzzer for Excessive Data Exposures. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on Software Engineering (Lisbon, Por-tugal) (ICSE ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 45, 12 pages. doi:10.1145/3597503.3608133 [18] Yuqiang Sun, Daoyuan Wu, Yue Xue, Han Liu, Haijun Wang, Zhengzi Xu, Xiaofei Xie, and Yang Liu. 2024. GPTScan: Detecting Logic Vulnerabilities in Smart Contracts by Combining GPT with Program Analysis . In 2024 IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) . IEEE Computer Society, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 2048–2060. doi:10.1145/3597503.3639117 [19] Saad Ullah, Mingji Han, Saurabh Pujar, Hammond Pearce, Ayse Coskun, and Gianluca Stringhini. 2024. LLMs Cannot Reliably Identify and Reason About Security Vulnerabilities (Yet?): A Comprehensive Evaluation, Framework, and Benchmarks . In 2024 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) . IEEE Com-puter Society, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 862–880. doi:10.1109/SP54263.2024.00210 [20] Sarisht Wadhwa, Luca Zanolini, Aditya Asgaonkar, Francesco D’Amato, Chengrui Fang, Fan Zhang, and Kartik Nayak. 2024. Data Independent Order Policy En-forcement: Limitations and Solutions. In Proceedings of the 2024 on ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security (Salt Lake City, UT, USA) 

(CCS ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 378–392. doi:10.1145/3658644.3670367 [21] Mingwei Zheng, Chengpeng Wang, Xuwei Liu, Jinyao Guo, Shiwei Feng, and Xiangyu Zhang. 2025. RFCAudit: AI Agent for Auditing Protocol Implementations Against RFC Specifications. In 2025 40th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE) . 1221–1233. doi:10.1109/ASE63991.2025. 00105 

## Open Science 

In accordance with the ACM CCS 2026 open science policy, we enumerate the artifacts supporting this work, their availability, and justifications for any restrictions. 

Artifacts provided for review. The following artifacts are available at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/speca and via the submission system: (i) the evaluation scripts (evaluate.py , matchers.py , analyze_deep.py ); (ii) all raw result data ( evaluation_summary.json , findings_labels.csv ,

deep_analysis.json ) and generated figures; (iii) per-repository output directories for all 10 Sherlock clients and all 15 RepoAudit C/C++ projects; (iv) all intermediate phase outputs (specification indices, subgraphs, generated properties, pre-/post-review findings) enabling offline inspection and partial re-execution; and (v) the SPECA pipeline implementation, including orchestration code, worker prompts, schema definitions, the STRIDE+CWE property generation templates, and the severity-preserving review filter. 

Artifacts not publicly released and justification. The pipeline source code and prompt templates are provided to reviewers via the anonymous artifact but will not be released as open-source software. This decision reflects dual-use risk: the pipeline consti-tutes a vulnerability-finding capability that, if publicly released, could lower the cost of offensive exploitation against specification-governed systems. While the per-bug cost is already within reach of well-resourced attackers (§4.2), broad public release would remove the barrier for less sophisticated adversaries. Additionally, respon-sible disclosure for the RepoAudit candidate bugs is in progress (8 PRs submitted, 2 maintainer-confirmed, 2 confirmed FP, 4 awaiting response); raw LLM responses referencing unfixed vulnerabilities CCS ’26, November 15–19, 2026, The Hague, The Netherlands Kamba, Murakami, and Sannai 

are redacted from the artifact and will remain so until disclosure is complete. 

Reproducibility. SPECA’s pipeline is deterministic given a fixed model configuration and seed, except for residual nondeterminism in provider-side LLM responses. We report exact model versions (Claude Opus, Claude Sonnet 4.5, Sonnet 4, DeepSeek R1) and total token consumption per phase to enable cost estimation prior to replication. The artifact includes all intermediate phase outputs so that reviewers can inspect the full pipeline trace and re-run individual phases offline without API access. 

Data provenance. The Sherlock contest data is sourced from the publicly released Sherlock Ethereum Fusaka contest adjudication record; we use only publicly released contest issues and severity judgments. The RepoAudit benchmark data is sourced from the published RepoAudit artifact [ 6]; we use only the 15 open-source C/C++ projects included in that benchmark. 

## Ethical Considerations 

Responsible disclosure. All Sherlock findings correspond to already-adjudicated contest issues. The 4 novel bugs have been remediated upstream (we reference only public fix commits). The RepoAudit candidate bugs follow responsible disclosure: 8 pull requests have been submitted to upstream repositories, 2 candi-dates confirmed by maintainers (Level A/B), and 2 confirmed as false positives; any unresolved candidate will be anonymized in the camera-ready version. 

Dual-use considerations. SPECA is a defensive tool, but vulnerability-finding is inherently dual-use. We believe publication benefits outweigh risks: the compute budget is already accessible to well-resourced attackers, every finding is traceable to an explicit property (aiding governance), and the pipeline is most useful in specification-grounded contexts where defenders operate. 

Human subjects and compute cost. This work involves no hu-man subjects; we used only publicly released contest adjudication data. Total API cost was $400–620 (RQ1) and $81–101 per model (RQ2), reported transparently in §4.2. 

## A Extended Related Work 

This appendix expands the summary of Section 2, retaining the three-axis organization. 

LLM-augmented code-level vulnerability detection. LLift [ 10 ]synergizes LLMs with static analysis to detect use-before-initialization bugs in the Linux kernel, using post-constraint guidance to help LLMs reason about path feasibility and dis-covering four previously unknown bugs. BugLens [ 11 ] guides LLMs through structured reasoning to assess security impact, improving taint-style bug detection precision approximately 7-fold (from 0.10 to 0.72) while uncovering four additional unreported vulnerabilities. IRIS [ 12 ] combines LLMs with CodeQL by having models infer project-specific taint specifications on-the-fly, detecting twice as many vulnerabilities as CodeQL alone while reducing false positives by 80%. LLMxCPG [ 9] uses code property graphs to extract minimal vulnerability-relevant code slices (reducing context by 67–91%) before LLM classification, achieving 15–40% F1 improvements over existing baselines. At the repository level, RepoAudit [ 6 ] deploys an autonomous LLM agent that explores code on demand along feasible program paths with a hallucination-mitigation validator, discovering 185 new bugs across high-profile C/C++ projects at 78% precision. GoSonar [ 1] addresses logical vulnerabilities in memory-safe languages—a class that escapes memory-safety tools—through inductive constraint reasoning at the binary level. Complementing these advances, empirical evaluations have shown that LLMs still exhibit non-deterministic responses and incorrect reasoning for vulnerability identification [ 19 ], and that widely-used benchmarks may significantly overestimate model performance [ 5]. While these approaches achieve strong results on code-level bug patterns, they start from repository-local information. When correctness depends on normative requirements from specifications, threat boundary assumptions, or protocol-level invariants, code-level starting points cannot assess whether an implementation satisfies its intended security expectations. SPECA addresses this gap by deriving security properties from specifications before examining code. 

LLM-driven security property generation. PropertyGPT [ 13 ], which received the NDSS 2025 Distinguished Paper Award, ap-plies retrieval-augmented generation to transfer knowledge from existing human-written properties to new smart contracts, achiev-ing 80% recall against expert-written properties and uncovering 12 zero-day vulnerabilities. GPTScan [ 18 ] was the first to com-bine GPT with static analysis for smart contract logic vulnerability detection by decomposing vulnerability types into scenarios and properties for matching, achieving over 90% precision on token contracts. iAudit [ 14 ] extends this approach with fine-tuned De-tector and Reasoner models augmented by LLM-based Ranker and Critic agents for iterative refinement. Beyond smart contracts, For-malBench [ 8] evaluates LLMs’ ability to synthesize formal program specifications for verification, finding that models perform well with simple control flows but struggle with loops and complex reasoning—suggesting that multi-phase pipelines with structured review are necessary for reliable specification inference. These ap-proaches share SPECA’s emphasis on explicit security properties as the unit of analysis, but derive properties primarily from code or existing verified properties rather than from authoritative natural-language specifications, and focus predominantly on smart contract verification. 

Specification-driven security analysis. RFCAudit [ 21 ] audits net-work protocol implementations against RFC specifications using an autonomous LLM agent with hierarchical code indexing, identifying 47 functional bugs across six protocol implementations with 81.9% precision. EDEFuzz [ 17 ] addresses specification-based security test-ing of web APIs, using API specifications to define data exposure vulnerabilities that lack explicit test oracles. Jin et al. [ 7] directly study LLMs verifying code against natural-language specifications, finding that complex prompting techniques paradoxically increase false-negative rates due to overcorrection bias—a result that moti-vates SPECA’s structured pipeline with severity-preserving filtering rather than aggressive LLM-based post-processing. Cortier et al. [ 2 ]demonstrate that even formal specifications (ideal functionalities) can fail to capture intuitively expected security properties, reveal-ing a fundamental challenge that SPECA’s structured error analysis addresses: many false positives arise from specification interpre-tation mismatches rather than arbitrary model hallucinations. In Beyond Code Reasoning: A Specification-Anchored Audit Framework for Expert-Augmented Security Verification CCS ’26, November 15–19, 2026, The Hague, The Netherlands 

the implementation domain, QUACK [ 4] enforces type-based secu-rity properties against deserialization attacks through static duck typing, and ISLAB [ 15 ] ensures integrity of kernel memory man-agement metadata through immutable metadata segregation—both exemplifying property-based security enforcement that SPECA ex-tends from enforcement to auditing. Wadhwa et al. [ 20 ] formalize specification-implementation gaps in blockchain ordering proto-cols, demonstrating that such gaps are a recognized and actively studied problem in the multi-implementation systems SPECA tar-gets. RFCAudit is closest in spirit to SPECA’s specification-driven approach but differs in three key respects beyond the functional-correctness vs. security-property distinction. First, RFCAudit uses implicit RFC compliance as its unit of reasoning, while SPECA derives explicit, typed security properties that serve as a shared vocabulary across implementations. Second, SPECA provides cross-implementation comparison under a shared property vocabulary. Third, SPECA’s structured false-positive taxonomy traces each false positive to its pipeline-phase origin, yielding actionable improve-ment targets rather than reporting only aggregate precision. 

Evaluation methodology considerations. Arp et al. [ 3] identify common pitfalls in the design, implementation, and evaluation of ML-based security systems—including sampling bias, label leakage, and unrealistic data distributions—that lead to inflated performance claims. We address these concerns in our evaluation design: the Sherlock benchmark uses independently labeled real-world audit contest data rather than synthetic vulnerabilities, we report preci-sion at three granularities to avoid single-metric inflation, and the structured false-positive taxonomy provides failure-mode analysis beyond aggregate metrics. 

## B Extended Design Details B.1 Phases 1–3: knowledge structuring details 

Phase 1 (Specification Discovery). Given a set of seed URLs point-ing to specification documents, the discovery phase recursively crawls linked pages within the specification domain and produces a structured index of discovered documents ( 01a_STATE.json ) with metadata (title, URL, document type). 

Phase 2 (Subgraph Extraction). Each specification document is decomposed into program graphs—state machines capturing con-trol flow, data flow, and invariant annotations—following the formal framework of Nielson and Nielson [ 16 ]. The extractor identifies (i) states and transitions, (ii) invariant annotations tagged from RFC 2119 modal verbs (e.g., “Nodes MUST maintain custody of at least CUSTODY_REQUIREMENT columns” becomes INV-001 ), and (iii) data flow constraints such as parameter validity ranges and cross-field dependencies. The output is a collection of enriched Mermaid diagrams ( .mmd ) with YAML frontmatter. 

Phase 3 (Property Generation). Phase 3 applies STRIDE— Spoofing, Tampering, Repudiation, Information Disclosure, Denial of Service, Elevation of Privilege—augmented with the CWE Top 25 enumeration in two stages. Stage A (Trust Model Analysis) : identify actors, map trust boundaries, and document assumptions for each subgraph. Stage B (Property Synthesis) : synthesize properties from six sources—STRIDE threats, trust boundary obligations, assump-tion properties, INV-* -derived invariants, state-transition proper-ties, and optimization correctness properties (e.g., cache key or dedu-plication key completeness). STRIDE is used as a thinking frame-work , not a checklist: categories that produce no relevant threats for a given subgraph are skipped rather than force-fitted. We chose STRIDE+CWE Top 25 over domain-specific taxonomies because SPECA targets specification-governed software in general; pre-liminary experiments showed that relying solely on specification-internal categories missed 40% of invariant-type properties that STRIDE surfaces. Severity is assigned using the bug-bounty scope document’s impact-based classification thresholds, not subjective importance judgments. 

## B.2 Phase 4: code pre-resolution details 

Phase 4 uses Tree-sitter-based symbol analysis (via get_symbols 

and run_query ) to link each property to concrete source locations. It identifies the primary enforcement location by matching speci-fication concepts (function names, data structures, protocol mes-sages) to source code symbols, discovers callers and callees to es-tablish the relevant code neighborhood, and builds a subgraph in-dex ( 01b_SUBGRAPH_INDEX.json ) mapping specification-level con-cepts to implementation artifacts. Properties classified as Informa-tional severity are dropped at this stage. Pre-resolution decouples code discovery from security reasoning; an alternative would be to let Phase 5 search for relevant code on-the-fly, but on-the-fly search is expensive and produces inconsistent code neighborhoods across properties. Pre-resolution reduces downstream audit token consumption by 40–60%. The trade-off is that pre-resolution may miss code locations unreachable through symbol analysis. 

## B.3 Implementation details 

We implement SPECA in Python using an asynchronous orchestra-tion framework: approximately 1,900 lines of orchestration code across 8 modules (configuration, base orchestrator, runner, watch-dog, resume manager, result collector, schema validation, batching) plus 1,373 lines of analysis prompts across 9 worker specifications. Key implementation details: 

• Orchestration. Each phase runs as an async Python process with workers executing in parallel via asyncio ; each worker invokes an LLM as a subprocess, enabling horizontal scaling across properties and implementations. 

• Fault tolerance. A circuit breaker shared across workers detects systemic failures (consecutive errors, budget over-runs, empty results) and triggers fast abort. Partial results are saved after each batch, enabling resume from any failure point. 

• Budget enforcement. Per-phase token budgets are en-forced at the runner level, preventing runaway costs on complex properties or large codebases. 

• Models. Phases 1–3 use Claude Opus for specification un-derstanding; Phases 4–6 use Claude Sonnet for code analysis and review. 

• Tools. Phase 4 uses Tree-sitter via MCP for symbol reso-lution; Phases 5–6 use file-system tools only (Read, Write, Grep, Glob). CCS ’26, November 15–19, 2026, The Hague, The Netherlands Kamba, Murakami, and Sannai 

• Data contracts. Inter-phase data flows use Pydantic-validated JSON schemas with cross-phase validation at boundaries. 

## B.4 Cross-implementation end-to-end example 

Consider auditing a property requiring nodes to rotate custody columns every CUSTODY_ROTATION_INTERVAL epochs across two implementations. Phase 3 generates the property from the specifi-cation with a unique identifier and invariant classification. Phase 4 resolves this property to rotateCustody() in Implementation A’s Nim source and to handleCustodyRotation() in Implementa-tion B’s Go source. Phase 5 audits both: in Implementation A, the interval check uses >= instead of == , causing premature ro-tation (finding: Low severity); in Implementation B, the function is called correctly (finding: PASS). Phase 6 confirms Implementa-tion A’s finding as a confirmed vulnerability (the rotation interval is controlled by protocol parameters, not trusted input). The same property produces a true positive in one implementation and a pass in another—exactly the kind of divergence that a shared property vocabulary is designed to reveal. 

## C Extended Evaluation: RQ1 C.1 Experimental setup details 

The main body Tables 4 and 5 summarize the Sherlock benchmark characteristics and the complete finding-label definitions. Below we provide a worked matching example. 

Matching example. Contest issue #308 reports a missing validation of data column index bounds in gossip message handling. SPECA produces four findings for the same reposi-tories: finding PROP-6a4369e9-inv-009 (Lighthouse), “Column index must be validated against NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS before acceptance”— match accepted , same root cause and same impact; 

PROP-6a4369e9-inv-010 (Lighthouse), “EL-sourced custody columns skip KZG verification”— partial match, excluded 

(different root cause); and PROP-6a4369e9-inv-008 (Nimbus), “Unreachable code path in data column sidecar construction”— no match . Under our protocol, issue #308 is counted as recovered (at least one match), and PROP-6a4369e9-inv-009 counts as one true positive. 

## C.2 Auxiliary RQ1 figures 

Figure 3 (main body) reports the Phase 5 vs Phase 6 metric tran-sition. Figure 5 (main body) shows the property-family-to-issue flow, and Figure 12 provides the full output quality breakdown. Ta-ble 15 provides a full accounting reconciliation of all finding counts reported in RQ1. 

## C.3 Property neighborhoods and cluster-level evaluation 

Many issues are recovered not by a single alert but by multiple com-plementary properties that form a property neighborhood around the root cause. The deep analysis identifies 11 issues matched by 2 or more properties (e.g., issues #308 and #331 each matched by 4 properties, issue #169 by 3). Conversely, 2 properties each match 

Table 15: Accounting reconciliation of all finding counts re-ported in RQ1. Each count traces to a single partition so that the precision numerator/denominator and FP-analysis popu-lation can be verified by a reader.                            

> Stage Findings Source
> Phase 5 total output 647 All properties audited Not-a-vuln / out-of-scope 545 Proof succeeded Positive output 102 Flagged findings
> Pre-review (N=102):
> Non-FP 58 19+5+26+2+6 FP 44 40+4
> Phase 6 review of 102:
> Survived 72
> DISPUTED_FP 30 20 FP, 10 TP
> Post-review (N=72):
> Non-FP 48 19+18+5+1+5 FP 24 23+1 Confirmed-useful 43 19+18+5+1
> FP analysis universes:
> Total FPs (both phases) 44 40+4 Deeply analyzed FPs 16 8 post + 8 filtered Property-type ablation subset 88 31+7+50

Figure 12: SPECA output quality breakdown (N=102). Of 102 pre-review findings, 48 are security-relevant in the final out-put, 24 are confirmed FPs, 20 are correctly filtered by Phase 6, and 10 are TPs lost to Phase 6 filtering. 

multiple issues (e.g., PROP-6a4369e9-inv-047 matches both #109 and #15). The main body Table 7 reports the finding-level vs cluster-level comparison. At the cluster level, 39 distinct root-cause clusters produce 19 clusters matching H/M/L issues (some issues are de-tected across multiple repositories, producing separate clusters per repository). The cluster-level strict precision (48.7%) is substantially higher than finding-level strict precision (26.4%), confirming that the property neighborhood provides genuine redundancy rather than alert duplication. 

## C.4 Cross-implementation patterns 

Eleven issues appear across multiple repositories under the same property vocabulary (e.g., issue #308 appears in Grandine, Lighthouse, Nimbus, and Prysm; #169 in Grandine, Lodestar, and Prysm; #331 in Lighthouse, Lodestar, and Prysm). Property 

PROP-6a4369e9-inv-014 asserts that blob parameters at fork Beyond Code Reasoning: A Specification-Anchored Audit Framework for Expert-Augmented Security Verification CCS ’26, November 15–19, 2026, The Hague, The Netherlands 

boundaries must be computed from the specification’s canoni-cal schedule. Under the shared property vocabulary, this property produces divergent outcomes: Grandine, Lighthouse, and Prysm use a local config default that diverges from the specification at fork epochs (all three TP, matched to issue #11), while Nimbus correctly reads the canonical schedule and the property passes— illustrating how a single property can function simultaneously as a true-positive detector in deviating implementations and a confor-mance certificate in compliant ones. 

Figure 13: Issue × property family TP finding counts (post-review). The property neighborhood effect is visible as hor-izontal bands where a single issue is detected by multiple complementary properties; shared vertical structure across repositories reflects the cross-implementation comparability the property vocabulary enables. 

Figure 6 (main body) shows the per-repository finding distribu-tion. 

## C.5 False-positive analysis: full detail 

Figure 14 visualizes the false-positive root-cause taxonomy. Of the 16 deeply analyzed FPs, trust-boundary errors account for 8 findings, code reading errors for 6, and specification mis-interpretation for 2. Phase 6 catches half of trust-boundary FPs (4/8) and two-thirds of code-reading FPs (4/6), but none of the specification-misinterpretation FPs (0/2), because the mechanical gates cannot resolve semantic ambiguity. Each root cause maps to a specific, implementable improvement: adding explicit trust boundary configuration to Phase 3 would address trust-boundary FPs; improving Phase 5’s code reading through richer context win-dows or multi-pass verification would address code reading errors; and requiring Phase 5 to re-read the relevant specification sec-tion before classifying a deviation as a vulnerability would address specification-misinterpretation FPs. 

Figure 14: False-positive root-cause taxonomy with pipeline-phase origins (N=16 deeply analyzed from 44 total FPs; see Table 9). The three causes each map to a distinct pipeline phase, making the failure surface structurally analyzable. 

## C.6 Phase 6 review gate analysis 

The main body Table 11 reports the Phase 6 verdict distribution and TP rates; here we provide further detail on the gate-level breakdown and design evolution. The current 3-gate system was simplified from an earlier 5-gate design that included two additional gates: Spec Cross-Reference (precision 0.00) and Exploitability (precision 0.00). These two gates were removed because they caused recall loss on informational true positives while providing negligible precision improvement. 

## C.7 Property-type ablation: supporting detail 

The main body Table 10 reports precision by property type over the 88-finding ablation subset. Figure 15 visualizes the per-type precision; the effect of excluding assumption-type findings on the post-review universe is shown in Table 16. 

Figure 15: Precision by property type (final output). Table 16: Effect of excluding assumption properties on the post-review universe (N=72).        

> Metric All types Excl. asm
> Precision 66.7% 67.1% H/M/L match rate 26.4% 27.1% CCS ’26, November 15–19, 2026, The Hague, The Netherlands Kamba, Murakami, and Sannai

## C.8 Specification contribution analysis: supporting detail 

The main body Table 12 and §4.3.5 summarize the retrospective spec-essentiality classification. For each detecting property, the provenance chain is: property → subgraph ( SG-NNN ) → specifica-tion section → INV label. For issues #319 and #376, the complete chain terminates at a specific INV label; for the remaining 13, the chain establishes spec provenance through subgraph references. 

## D Extended Evaluation: RQ2 D.1 RQ2 auxiliary figures 

The main body Table 14 lists the 18 candidate bugs from Sonnet 4, including two externally validated above Level D (one Level A, one Level B); see main body for details. Here we provide additional RQ2 figures. Figure 9 (main body) shows TP vs FP across all tools. 

Figure 16: Precision vs total bugs found across all tools and configurations. 

## D.2 Cost–output trade-off 

SPECA’s cost ($400–620 for RQ1, $81.05 for RQ2) is approximately 

2× higher than the best code-driven baseline, reflecting a delib-erate trade-off: code-driven tools optimize for cost-efficient bug detection, while SPECA trades cost for richer artifact generation— specification-derived property vocabularies, structured proof traces, cross-implementation coverage analysis, and an interpretable false-positive taxonomy. The per-bug cost on RepoAudit ($1.69/bug) remains orders of magnitude below manual audit rates ($200– 500/hour), and specification-processing phases (Phases 1–3) amor-tize across multiple implementations of the same specification. 

Figure 17: Bug type breakdown (NPD / MLK / UAF) across tools. 

Figure 18: Per-project bug detection heatmap across tools. 

## E Extended Discussion and Future Work E.1 Unexpected results 

The most unexpected finding is the dominance of the property neighborhood effect: 11 of 15 matched issues are recovered by 2 or more distinct properties. We initially expected a one-to-one relationship between properties and issues, but the many-to-one structure suggests that real vulnerabilities manifest as clusters of Beyond Code Reasoning: A Specification-Anchored Audit Framework for Expert-Augmented Security Verification CCS ’26, November 15–19, 2026, The Hague, The Netherlands 

Figure 19: Bug detection matrix (40 total bugs: 35 non-disputed ground truth, 5 disputed). 

related property violations rather than isolated deviations. This has implications for triage: rather than presenting individual alerts, security tools could group findings by their shared root cause. The false-positive phase-origin analysis revealed an unexpected compounding pattern: most FPs originate in Phase 5, but many are seeded by weaker outputs from earlier phases. A property with an over-broad assertion from Phase 3, combined with a missed code resolution in Phase 4, produces a confident-but-wrong finding in Phase 5. This suggests that targeted improvements to early-phase output quality would disproportionately reduce downstream false positives. 

## E.2 Extended threats to validity 

Internal validity. Issue matching between SPECA findings and contest issues uses LLM-assisted semantic matching, which may introduce matching errors. We mitigate this by manually verifying all matches. The 4 independently discovered bugs are confirmed by fix commits, providing objective validation independent of our matching procedure. 

Construct validity. Precision depends on contest-organizer sever-ity judgments, which may contain inconsistencies. The contest’s severity thresholds require network-wide impact for Medium/High classification, meaning that operationally significant but localized bugs may be classified as Informational or out-of-scope. Our finding labels distinguish between tp (H/M/L match) and tp_info (infor-mational match) to provide transparency. 

Statistical validity. We do not report significance tests because the benchmarks are deterministic (single-run pipeline with fixed model configurations, not stochastic). For RQ2, we use published baseline numbers from the RepoAudit paper, which are also single-run. The cost estimate reflects actual API charges and is reproducible given the same model pricing. 

## E.3 Future work 

Near-term extensions. The structured false-positive taxonomy directly prescribes three targeted improvements. Incorporating ex-plicit trust boundary configuration would address trust-boundary false positives (the largest category at 50%). Improving code reading accuracy through richer context windows or multi-pass verifica-tion would address code reading errors (37.5%). Requiring the audit phase to re-read the relevant specification section before classifying deviations would address specification-misinterpretation false pos-itives (12.5%). Each improvement targets a specific pipeline phase, enabling incremental validation. 

Medium-term directions. First, applying property-centered au-diting to additional specification-governed domains—network pro-tocol implementations (TLS, QUIC), cryptographic libraries, and dis-tributed consensus systems—would test whether the approach gen-eralizes beyond the two benchmarks studied here. Second, improv-ing postcondition and assumption property generation represents a concrete research frontier: invariant properties currently account for 76% of findings and the highest precision (75.0%), while assump-tion properties achieve 0% precision. Unlike invariants, which can be verified against explicit enforcement code, assumptions describe conditions a component relies on but does not enforce . Potential approaches include generating assumptions only when an explicit trust boundary exists in the scope document, or reformulating assumptions as preconditions on the component’s input interface. 

Long-term vision. The property neighborhood phenomenon sug-gests a broader principle: real vulnerabilities manifest as clusters of related property violations rather than isolated deviations. Ex-ploiting this structure for automated triage, where findings are grouped by shared root cause rather than presented as independent alerts, could fundamentally change how security audit output is con-sumed. More ambitiously, integrating property-centered auditing with formal verification and differential testing could pair spec-level semantic understanding with the deep state-space exploration these complementary techniques provide.