Title: Entropy-based Code Adversarial Translation for Real-world Repository Migration

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.09273v2

Published Time: Wed, 12 Aug 2026 00:42:18 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
# Entropy-based Code Adversarial Translation for Real-world Repository Migration 

Yushun Tang 1, Yisen Cao 1,2 , Zhicheng Chen 1,Lin Peng 1, Junkang Mao 1, Fengyi Song 1, Yantao Jia 1

> 1

Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd., 2The Chinese University of Hong Kong 

{tangyushun2, caoyisen, chenzhicheng17, penglin44, maojunkang, songfengyi1, jiayantao}@huawei.com 

Abstract 

LLMs have demonstrated strong capabilities in code gener-ation and automated program repair, but migrating an en-tire repository rarely produces a runnable application be-cause long-horizon translation challenges LLM-based agents’ ability to maintain repository-level migration objectives. In this work, we propose Entropy-based Code Adversarial Translation (ECAT), a multi-agent framework for automated Android-to-HarmonyOS repository migration. ECAT formu-lates repository migration as adversarial entropy minimization through a generator-discriminator architecture. The discrimi-nator measures migration quality using a unified metric called Code Entropy and produces text gradients that specify both file-level generation directives and the skills needed to exe-cute them. Guided by these optimization signals, the genera-tor iteratively updates the repository, and each update is ac-cepted only if it reduces Code Entropy. Repeated generator– discriminator interactions progressively drive the migration from an initial template toward a functionally complete Har-monyOS repository. Successful low-entropy trajectories are further distilled into a self-evolving memory tree, enabling transferable migration knowledge across repositories. We also introduce A2H-RepoBench, the first real-world benchmark for Android-to-HarmonyOS repository migration, covering ap-plications from tens of thousands to hundreds of thousands of lines of code. Evaluated by node alignment and an agent-based functional judge, ECAT achieves 74.7% overall migra-tion quality and consistently outperforms existing agent-based methods across repositories of different scales. 

Code — https://github.com/yushuntang/ECAT 

1 Introduction 

Large language models (LLMs) have fundamentally ad-vanced software engineering by enabling code generation and automated program repair from natural language and code repositories (Zhang et al. 2024; Jimenez et al. 2024; Yang et al. 2024). Among these tasks, repository migration remains particularly challenging because it requires long-horizon reasoning (Dong et al. 2026) over large software repositories, where generation errors accumulate and propa-gate across long-range dependencies (Wang et al. 2026). 

Copyright © 2027, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved. 

Android-to-HarmonyOS migration is an emerging rep-resentative repository migration task. Unlike file-level code translation or generation, it requires jointly transforming pro-gramming languages, UI frameworks, project configurations, and platform APIs while preserving repository-wide func-tionality. As repository size scales from tens to hundreds of thousands of lines of code (LOC), cross-file dependen-cies and long-range interactions rapidly increase, making globally consistent repository optimization increasingly dif-ficult. Despite recent progress, existing agentic software en-gineering systems still struggle at this scale. Long-context reasoning becomes less reliable as repository size grows, making it difficult to preserve cross-file consistency (Liu et al. 2024a). Most systems therefore rely on iterative self-refinement, where the same agent repeatedly generates and evaluates repository updates (Madaan et al. 2023; Shinn et al. 2023; Yao et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2025). Such self-evaluation often overestimates intermediate repository quality (Zheng et al. 2023), leading to premature convergence despite unre-solved compilation errors, broken dependencies, or missing functionality. Moreover, migration experience from previous repositories is rarely accumulated, causing similar optimiza-tion trajectories to be repeatedly rediscovered from scratch. Inspired by the adversarial learning paradigm of gener-ative adversarial networks (Goodfellow et al. 2014), in this work, we formulate repository migration as an adversarial en-tropy minimization problem. LLM-based code generation is inherently probabilistic, where migration errors and inconsis-tencies introduced during generation accumulate across files and modules, progressively increasing repository-level disor-der. We characterize this disorder using Code Entropy , where higher entropy indicates greater uncertainty, inconsistency, and unresolved migration errors within the generated reposi-tory. Following the principle of entropy minimization (Wang et al. 2021; Agarwal et al. 2026), Code Entropy serves as a unified repository-level objective that measures repository correctness, migration fidelity, and runtime functionality. To optimize this objective, we propose Entropy-based Code Adversarial Translation ( ECAT ), a generator–discriminator framework that explicitly decouples repository generation from quality evaluation. The generator performs Android-to-HarmonyOS code generation, while an independent dis-criminator continuously evaluates repository quality, exposes high-entropy regions, and produces fine-grained text gradi-arXiv:2608.09273v2 [cs.AI] 11 Aug 2026 ents (Yuksekgonul et al. 2024) that localize defects and rec-ommend corresponding skills (Zheng et al. 2026b). Guided by these optimization signals, the generator iteratively repairs the repository to reduce Code Entropy, forming an adversar-ial optimization loop in which the discriminator continually uncovers repository disorder while the generator progres-sively eliminates it. By separating generation from evalua-tion, ECAT enables sustained repository-level optimization instead of relying on the limited self-correction capability of a single agent. Successful low-entropy optimization tra-jectories are further distilled into a self-evolving memory tree, where migration knowledge is hierarchically organized, continuously refined, and transferred across repositories. To facilitate systematic evaluation, we introduce A2H-RepoBench, the first real-world multiscale repository-level benchmark for Android-to-HarmonyOS migration. A2H-RepoBench comprises three representative real-world An-droid repositories spanning 50K, 120K, and 300K LOC, to-gether with curated functional specifications and a unified evaluation protocol. These repository scales cover represen-tative sizes of mature Android applications and introduce progressively more complex repository structures and cross-file dependencies, providing a realistic testbed for evaluat-ing migration scalability. Experiments on A2H-RepoBench demonstrate that ECAT consistently outperforms represen-tative agentic baselines in migration quality. The major con-tributions of this work can be summarized as follows: 

• We formulate Android-to-HarmonyOS repository migra-tion as an adversarial entropy minimization problem and introduce Code Entropy, a unified repository-level objec-tive that quantifies repository disorder in terms of migra-tion correctness and fidelity. Code Entropy provides an explicit optimization target for long-horizon repository migration. 

• We propose ECAT, a generator–discriminator frame-work that explicitly decouples repository generation from repository evaluation. Instead of allowing an agent to judge its own outputs, an independent discriminator pro-duces fine-grained text gradients that iteratively guide repository generation or repair. Successful trajectories are continuously distilled into a self-evolving memory tree, where migration knowledge is hierarchically organized and incrementally refined, enabling transferable experi-ence across repositories. 

• We construct A2H-RepoBench, the first repository-level benchmark for Android-to-HarmonyOS migration. A2H-RepoBench comprises three representative real-world Android repositories spanning 50K, 120K, and 300K LOC, together with functional specifications and a uni-fied evaluation protocol. Extensive experiments on A2H-RepoBench demonstrate that ECAT consistently outper-forms baselines in long-horizon migration quality. 

2 Related Work 

LLM-based agents. Large language models are increas-ingly deployed as autonomous agents that combine reason-ing, tool use, memory retrieval, and environmental feedback. Early approaches relied on self-refinement, verbal reflection, and ReAct to improve a single agent’s outputs (Madaan et al. 2023; Shinn et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2024; Yao et al. 2023). More recently, multi-agent systems coordinate specialized agents for software development (Hong et al. 2024; Qian et al. 2024), test-driven programming (Huang et al. 2023), repository-level issue resolution (Yang et al. 2024; Zhang et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2025; Jimenez et al. 2024), and repair pipelines (Xia et al. 2024). Recent surveys (Jiang et al. 2026) further identify self-improving agents as an emerging paradigm that continually evolves agent capabil-ities through accumulated experience during deployment. External memory has consequently emerged as a key mecha-nism for continual improvement without modifying model parameters. Existing memory-augmented agents store in-teraction histories, retrieved experiences, or reusable skills in external memories to improve future decision making (Park et al. 2023; Packer et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023). Despite these advances, repository migration remains chal-lenging because it requires maintaining global consistency over thousands of interdependent files across many optimiza-tion iterations. Moreover, generation and evaluation are often performed by the same agent, making feedback susceptible to self-confirmation bias (Zheng et al. 2023; Huang et al. 2024). ECAT instead separates generation from evaluation through a generator–discriminator architecture and continu-ously evolves a shared hierarchical memory that stores trans-ferable migration knowledge. 

Code migration. Recent advances in large code LLMs have substantially improved code migration and translation capabilities (Chen et al. 2021; Rozière et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023). Recent work further extends it from individual func-tions to entire repositories by explicitly modeling project structures and cross-file dependencies. AlphaTrans performs hierarchical repository translation through static analysis and intermediate validation (Ibrahimzada et al. 2025), Skeleton-Guided Translation constrains generation with repository skeletons (Zhang et al. 2025), RepoTransBench introduces executable repository benchmarks together with a ReAct-based translation agent (Wang et al. 2026), and ReCodeAgent coordinates multiple specialized agents for repository trans-lation (Ibrahimzada et al. 2026). The repositories used in RepoTransBench and ReCodeAgent contain approximately 2,394 and 1,975 LOC on average, respectively, making repository reasoning relatively short-horizon. Android-to-HarmonyOS migration focus primarily on individual migra-tion stages, including UI translation (Gong et al. 2025; Zheng et al. 2026a), Java-to-ArkTS translation (Liu et al. 2024b), and ArkTS program repair (Xie et al. 2026). In contrast, our proposed A2H-RepoBench contains real-world Android repositories ranging from 50K to 300K LOC, where migra-tion becomes a long-horizon optimization problem requiring consistent reasoning over hundreds of interdependent source files and platform-specific components. Rather than translat-ing individual components independently, ECAT jointly opti-mizes source code, resources, and runtime behaviors through an entropy-guided adversarial optimization loop. Source Repository 

ℛS (Android) 

Generator Agent 

G

> Generate and repair repository
> Repository Update
> generate and repair repository
> Memory Retrieval
> retrieve relevant experience from the memory tree
> Repository State

ℛt

> (Target, e.g., HarmonyOS)

Discriminator Agent 

D

> Evaluate quality and guide optimization
> Entropy Evaluation
> compute Code Entropy
> Ht
> Text Gradient
> provide generation guidance
> gt
> Memory Distillation
> distill successful trajectory to memory
> Skill Orchestration
> select skills per worklist

Ht ≤ ϵ ?    

> Ht> ϵ Ht≤ ϵ HMOS
> Migrated Target Repository

Self-Evolving Memory Tree 

Mt 

> Shared by Generator and Discriminator
> Hierarchical Structure
> API / UI / Pattern / Project Dependency / Bug / Fix / ...
> Evolution Mechanism
> Generate Evaluate
> Shared Android source Repository generation Quality evaluation Memory read / write Text gradient
> Android source code shared by both agents

Rt+1 ← bRt+1  

> summarize and store accepted trajectories (entropyreducing) to Mt+1
> Text Gradient gt

Figure 1: Overview of ECAT. ECAT performs repository migration through an entropy-based adversarial optimization loop between a Generator agent G and an independent Discriminator agent D. Starting from a source Android repository, the Generator iteratively updates the target HarmonyOS repository, while the Discriminator estimates Code Entropy and produces text gradients to guide repository optimization. The optimization terminates when the estimated entropy falls below a predefined threshold ϵ. Entropy-reducing updates are distilled into the shared self-evolving memory tree. 

3 Method 

In this section, we present our method of ECAT to migrate software repositories across platforms automatically. 

3.1 Problem Formulation and Method Overview 

Given a source application repository RS = {f Si }N

> i=1

, where 

N denotes the number of source files and f Si denotes the i-th source file, our goal is to automatically migrate it into a target HarmonyOS repository RT . Unlike file-level code transla-tion, repository migration requires preserving consistency across numerous interdependent source files, project config-urations, and navigation graphs. As repository size grows, sparse attention in long-context LLMs gradually weakens global dependency modeling, making repository-level con-sistency increasingly difficult to preserve. LLM-based repository generation is inherently probabilis-tic, causing migration errors to accumulate throughout the repository and progressively increase repository-level disor-der. We characterize this disorder using the proposed Code Entropy H(R), where higher entropy indicates greater uncer-tainty and unresolved migration errors. Repository migration is therefore formulated as the following entropy minimization problem, 

π∗ = arg min  

> π

EH(RT ) , (1) where π∗ denotes the optimal migration policy, RT denotes the final migrated repository after optimization, and the ex-pectation is taken over the stochastic repository generation process. To solve this repository-level optimization problem, we propose Entropy-based Code Adversarial Translation (ECAT) as shown in Figure 1, which decouples repository generation from repository evaluation through two special-ized agents: a generator G(·) and an independent discrim-inator D(·). At optimization iteration t, the discriminator analyzes the current migrated repository and produces an estimated Code Entropy together with a structured text gra-dient gt, while the generator updates the repository accord-ing to the generated optimization signal. Once the estimated entropy falls below a predefined threshold, the optimiza-tion terminates and outputs the final HarmonyOS reposi-tory. Successful entropy-reducing optimization trajectories are distilled into the shared self-evolving memory tree Mt,enabling both repository generation and repository evalua-tion to continuously improve across migration tasks without updating model parameters. 

3.2 Repository-level Code Entropy 

Repository migration quality cannot be adequately character-ized by a single criterion such as compilation success or run-time execution, since a migrated repository may successfully compile while still containing missing functionalities, in-consistent navigation, or platform-specific migration errors. We therefore introduce Code Entropy , a unified repository-level optimization objective score that quantifies the over-all disorder of a migrated repository. We use entropy as an analogy to characterize repository-level uncertainty caused by unresolved migration inconsistencies, rather than a strict information-theoretic entropy. Code Entropy serves as a com-putable quality proxy that aggregates migration errors across multiple complementary dimensions into a single optimiza-tion objective whose value decreases as migration defects are progressively resolved. Consequently, higher Code Entropy indicates greater uncertainty, inconsistency, and unresolved migration errors, whereas lower Code Entropy corresponds to a structurally complete, semantically faithful, and func-tionally executable repository. Given the source Android repository RS and the migrated HarmonyOS repository state Rt, repository quality is char-acterized from K complementary entropy dimensions. Let 

E = [ e1, e 2, . . . , e K ]⊤, ei ∈ [0 , 1] ,

denote the repository entropy vector, where ei is the normal-ized entropy score, i.e., the uncertainty of migration correct-ness for the i-th evaluated entropy dimension. Each dimen-sion is assigned a non-negative importance weight 

W = [ w1, w 2, . . . , w K ]⊤, wi ≥ 0.

The weights wi encode the relative severity of different mi-gration defects and are used to primarily govern repair prior-itization. In practice, we assign coarse weights in the range 

[0 .1, 0.3] . ECAT is insensitive to their exact values, and a sen-sitivity analysis is provided in the supplementary material. The overall Code Entropy is computed as 

H(Rt) = W⊤E1⊤W , (2) where 1 denotes the all-one vector for normalization. Conse-quently, H(R) ∈ [0 , 1] , with larger values indicating greater repository disorder. Each entropy score is estimated as 

ei = ψi(RS , Rt), (3) where ψi(·) denotes the entropy estimator of the i-th evalu-ated entropy dimension. Depending on the observability of the migration defect, ψi(·) is implemented using either de-terministic rule-based verification or agentic LLM judges. Deterministic verification is applied to objectively observ-able properties such as compilation success and placeholder counts, whereas LLM judges are employed for inherently semantic properties including migration fidelity, runtime be-havior, and UI consistency. Notably, all entropy dimensions are defined at the level of generic migration defects and con-tain no application-specific functional requirements. For clarity, we divide entropy dimensions into static and dynamic entropy. Static entropy evaluates repository correct-ness without execution, including compilation, structure, and migration fidelity, whereas dynamic entropy captures run-time defects after deployment on the HarmonyOS emulator, such as crashes and UI inconsistencies. Both categories are normalized and aggregated through Eq. (2) to form the uni-fied Code Entropy objective. 

3.3 Entropy-guided Adversarial Optimization 

Code Entropy provides a unified optimization objective for the migration, while the remaining challenge is how to reduce repository disorder during long-horizon translation. Reposi-tory migration naturally involves two processes: identifying unresolved defects and repairing them. ECAT therefore em-ploys two specialized agents with distinct responsibilities. Inspired by adversarial verification, the discriminator acts as an adversarial evaluator that challenges the current reposi-tory state by exposing high-entropy regions and generating optimization signals, while the generator improves the repos-itory by eliminating the identified defects. Both agents are re-instantiated with isolated contexts at every iteration, so neither can access the other’s reasoning traces or inherit bias from its own previous judgments. Their interaction estab-lishes a challenge-and-repair optimization loop that progres-sively drives repository states toward lower code entropy. At optimization iteration t, given the source repository 

RS , the current migrated repository Rt, and the shared self-evolving memory tree Mt, the discriminator evaluates the current repository and produces an estimated Code Entropy together with a structured text gradient, 

(Ht, gt) = D(Mt; RS , Rt), (4) where Ht denotes the estimated Code Entropy of the current repository and gt denotes the corresponding text gradient for repository optimization. Because repository optimization is performed in the discrete code space, numerical gradients cannot be propagated through repository states. Instead, the discriminator translates repository defects into structured text gradients (Yuksekgonul et al. 2024) that explicitly identify high-entropy regions, diagnose migration failures, prioritize repair targets, and recommend the corresponding skills as shown in Figure 2.                

> Text Gradient
> {"summary": "Fix 5migration issues across ...", "work_list": [{"file": "ExportFavoritesPage.ets", "issues": "ExportFavoritesPage.ets: exportAll() does not set pendingExportPath ...", "suggested_skills": "arkts-codebase-debug" }, ...] }

Figure 2: An example of the structured text gradient gener-ated by the discriminator in the Gallery repository migration. Guided by the exposed defects, the generator updates the repository according to 

Rt+1 = G gt, Mt; RS , Rt

 , (5) where gt denotes the structured text gradient generated by the discriminator and Mt denotes the shared self-evolving mem-ory. These structured optimization signals enable the genera-tor to coordinate edits across multiple correlated source files, project configurations, resource files, and navigation graphs while preserving repository-level consistency. At each itera-tion, the discriminator challenges the current repository by exposing previously unresolved defects, while the genera-tor repairs these defects to reduce Code Entropy. This al-ternating process progressively drives the repository toward lower-disorder states. To guarantee entropy reduction, a candidate repository is accepted only if its Code Entropy decreases. Let bRt+1 denote the candidate repository generated after applying the current text gradient. The accepted repository is determined by 

Rt+1 =

( bRt+1 , H( bRt+1 ) < H (Rt),

Rt, otherwise , (6) which guarantees that every accepted repository update monotonically reduces estimated Code Entropy. To avoid premature convergence caused by transient entropy fluctu-ations, ECAT adopts a sliding-window stopping criterion. Optimization terminates when the repository Code Entropy remains below a predefined threshold ϵ during the most re-cent l iterations, 

H(Rt−i) ≤ ϵ, i = 0 , . . . , l − 1, (7) where l denotes the sliding-window size. 

3.4 Self-evolving Memory Tree 

Unlike prior agent memory that stores flat experiences (Packer et al. 2023), continual improvement is achieved through a shared self-evolving memory tree, which serves as the only learnable component continuously updated dur-ing deployment. The memory accumulates reusable migra-tion experience from entropy-reducing optimization trajec-tories and provides transferable knowledge for repository generation. As migration experience grows, a flat memory becomes increasingly inefficient and introduces excessive re-trieval context. ECAT therefore organizes the accumulated experience hierarchically, enabling coarse-to-fine retrieval that focuses only on defect-relevant branches. Figure 3 illus-trates the memory organization. Each layer of the tree has an index directory for the agent to automatically retrieve rel-evant memories layer by layer. The root node stores global migration knowledge, intermediate nodes organize reusable patterns by coarse defect categories (e.g., navigation adap-tation, cross-platform porting, and stub detection), and leaf nodes maintain generalized migration patterns consisting of representative defects, root causes, and verification criteria. Repository-specific implementation details are discarded to maximize transferability across repositories. Root  

> (Global Memory)
> Category Nodes
> (Migration Pattern Categories)
> Leaf Nodes
> (Per-Pattern Entries)
> Memory-Root
> (Self-Evolving Memory Tree)
> Navigation & Routing Cross-Platform Porting Stub Detection
> Register page routes Require nav params Map Activity to Ability ViewPager to Swiper Hardcoded return stub No-op event handlers
> ... ... ...

Figure 3: The hierarchical self-evolving memory tree. Algorithm 1: Entropy-based Code Adversarial Translation 

Require: Source repository RS , initial target repository R0,initial memory tree M0, maximum iterations τ , entropy threshold ϵ

Ensure: Migrated target repository RT

1: (H0, g0) ← D(M0; RS , R0)

2: for t = 0 to τ − 1 do 

3: if Ht ≤ ϵ then 

4: return Rt

5: end if 

6: bRt+1 ← G(gt, Mt; RS , Rt)

7: (Ht+1 , gt+1 ) ← D(Mt; RS , bRt+1 )

8: if Ht+1 < H t then 

9: Rt+1 ← bRt+1 , Distill to memory Mt+1 .

10: else 

11: Rt+1 ← R t, Mt+1 ← M t

12: end if 

13: end for 

14: RT ← R t+1 

15: return RT

After each optimization iteration, the discriminator distills successful entropy-reducing trajectories into the correspond-ing memory branches. Newly discovered patterns are merged with existing nodes whenever possible, while redundant en-tries are consolidated to maintain a compact hierarchy. Dur-ing migration, both agents retrieve task-relevant branches to guide repository repair, defect localization, entropy estima-tion, and text-gradient generation. Consequently, ECAT self-evolves by continually acquiring and organizing transferable migration knowledge in the memory tree, enabling sustained performance improvements across repositories. The overall ECAT procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1. 

4 Experiments 

4.1 Benchmark and Metrics 

To evaluate repository-level Android-to-HarmonyOS migra-tion, we construct A2H-RepoBench , a benchmark consist-ing of three representative open-source Android repositories spanning different repository scales. Unlike existing bench-marks that primarily focus on file-level translation, A2H-RepoBench emphasizes repository-level migration, requiring models to simultaneously preserve cross-file dependencies, resource consistency, and runtime functionality throughout long-horizon repository optimization. The benchmark con-tains three real-world applications with progressively in-creasing repository complexity: Gallery (50K LOC) (Simple Mobile Tools 2023), AntennaPod (120K LOC) (AntennaPod Contributors 2026), and Meshtastic (300K LOC) (Meshtastic Contributors 2026). Gallery is a multimedia application that mainly evaluates user interface migration and media manage-ment. AntennaPod is a podcast management application in-volving multimedia playback and asynchronous task schedul-ing, presenting substantially more complex cross-module de-pendencies. Meshtastic is a large-scale mesh communication application supporting Bluetooth communication and hard-ware interaction, posing significant challenges for long-range dependency preservation. Together, these repositories cover repository scales ranging from tens of thousands to hundreds of thousands of lines of code, enabling a comprehensive eval-uation under increasingly challenging migration scenarios. Following migration, repository quality is evaluated from two perspectives: Node Alignment and Agent-as-Judge 

(Zhuge et al. 2025). Node Alignment measures structural preservation by constructing platform-agnostic semantic graphs for the Android and HarmonyOS repositories. Specif-ically, semantic graphs for both the Android and HarmonyOS repositories are constructed using CodeGraph (McHenry 2026), and node alignment is computed by matching their platform-agnostic semantic nodes. The alignment score is then computed as 

Align = |M ||Vs| , (8) where Vs denotes the semantic nodes of the Android reposi-tory and M denotes the matched node pairs in HarmonyOS. Agent-as-Judge evaluates functional preservation using a predefined feature checklist, where each feature is assigned a score si of 1, 0.5, or 0 (Full, Partial, or Missing), yielding 

Agent = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

si, (9) where N is the number of evaluated features. Note that the discriminator in Sec. 3 evaluates only application-agnostic defect categories, with no access to the feature checklist used at evaluation. To facilitate reproducible evaluation, we pack-age the entire protocol as a reusable skill, a2h-evaluate ,which can be directly invoked by arbitrary LLM agents. More details are provided in the supplementary material. 

4.2 Implementation Details and Baselines 

Unless otherwise specified, all methods use DeepSeek-V4-Pro as the underlying LLM, while the second-stage dy-namic Code Entropy optimization uses the multimodal LLM Qwen3.7-Plus to evaluate runtime GUI states from emula-tor screenshots. A three-level self-evolving memory tree is shared by the generator and discriminator. Repository op-timization terminates once the estimated Code Entropy re-mains below a predefined threshold within a sliding window of size two. We fix ϵ = 0 .01 for all experiments. All methods are evaluated under identical execution environments and repository inputs. We compare ECAT with three representative agentic soft-ware engineering frameworks. OpenHands (Wang et al. 2025) is a general-purpose software engineering agent that performs repository understanding, code editing, command execution, and tool invocation through a ReAct-style self-feedback interaction loop. RepoTransAgent (Wang et al. 2026) is a ReAct-based repository translation agent that iter-atively alternates between repository inspection, code edit-ing, command execution, and repository search in a self-feedback manner. ReCodeAgent (Ibrahimzada et al. 2026) is a multi-agent repository translation framework that coor-dinates specialized agents for repository analysis, planning, code translation, and validation. Table 1: Comparison results (%) of different methods across code repositories in A2H-RepoBench. “w/o DE” means re-moving emulator-based Dynamic Entropy evaluation.                                                          

> Method Gallery AntennaPod Meshtastic Avg.
> Align Agent Align Agent Align Agent OpenHands 40.0 4.3 9.8 12.2 8.1 9.7 14.0 RepoTransAgent 36.0 10.5 4.2 20.4 2.3 6.6 13.3 ReCodeAgent 84.0 36.1 44.0 21.7 59.9 32.6 46.4
> ECAT w/o DE 85.3 83.4 62.4 74.7 61.5 68.6 72.7
> ECAT (Ours) 84.9 85.6 69.5 74.7 62.0 71.2 74.7
> ±0.8 ±4.9 ±6.5 ±2.7 ±0.6 ±2.3 ±1.7

4.3 Results 

Quantitative Results. Table 1 reports the quantitative re-sults on three real-world repositories of varying scales. All ECAT results are averaged over three independent runs, with standard deviations reported in the last row. ECAT consis-tently achieves the best performance under both Node Align-ment and Agent-as-Judge across all repositories, improving the average score from 46.4% achieved by the strongest base-line to 74.7%. Notably, OpenHands and RepoTransAgent suf-fer from self-evaluation bias, while ReCodeAgent, though validated independently, lacks an iterative repair loop. Re-CodeAgent attains relatively high Node Alignment but much lower Agent-as-Judge scores because many translated classes preserve the repository structure while containing only shal-low implementations or placeholder logic. Although larger repositories such as Meshtastic remain more challenging due to extensive cross-file dependencies, ECAT consistently maintains the best performance under both metrics. Re-moving Dynamic Entropy drops the average from 74.7% to 72.7%, mainly on runtime-heavy repositories, while Gallery remains barely affected. These results demonstrate that de-coupling repository generation from quality evaluation and iteratively minimizing Code Entropy leads to more faith-ful repository migration than existing methods. Additional results including different base LLMs are provided in the supplementary. 

Qualitative UI Comparison. Figure 4 presents a qualita-tive comparison of the migrated home page of the Anten-naPod application. ECAT produces a HarmonyOS interface that closely matches the original Android application in both layout and functionality, preserving the navigation bar and interactive widgets. Removing Dynamic Entropy leads to noticeable UI degradation, including missing icons and in-complete layout rendering, indicating that static verification alone cannot adequately capture runtime interface quality. Existing repository migration agents exhibit more severe fail-ures. These qualitative results demonstrate that minimizing Code Entropy through adversarial optimization substantially improves both structural fidelity and functional complete-Android ECAT ECAT w/o Dynamic Entropy ReCodeAgent RepoTransAgent OpenHands Figure 4: Qualitative comparison of the migrated AntennaPod home page. ECAT preserves the original Android layout, navigation structure, and functional widgets with high visual fidelity. 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 Iteration 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 Code Entropy        

> ECAT ECAT w/o MT Threshold (0.01) 010 20 30 40 50 60 70 Iteration 020 40 60 80 100 120 Cumulative tokens, excl. cache (M)
> ECAT ECAT w/o MT

Figure 5: Optimization dynamics of ECAT on the Gallery repository. (a) Evolution of Code Entropy during adversarial optimization. A memory tree (MT) built from successful migration trajectories of the other repositories enables faster entropy reduction and earlier convergence. (b) Corresponding cumulative token consumption. Faster convergence with the memory tree substantially reduces inference cost while reaching the same entropy threshold. ness of the migrated repository. UI comparison for the other repositories is provided in the supplementary. 

Optimization dynamics and memory transfer. Figure 5 illustrates the optimization process of ECAT on the Gallery 

repository. The self-evolving memory tree is initialized ex-clusively from successful migration trajectories of the other repositories in A2H-RepoBench to evaluate cross-repository transfer. As shown in Figure 5(a), Code Entropy decreases rapidly during the early iterations as major migration defects are repaired, and then gradually converges as the remaining errors become increasingly fine-grained. With the memory tree, ECAT reaches the stopping criterion in only 38 iter-ations, compared with 66 iterations without memory (w/o MT), demonstrating that transferable migration knowledge accelerates defect localization and repair. This faster conver-gence also substantially reduces inference cost. As shown in Figure 5(b), ECAT with memory consumes nearly half as many cumulative tokens ( ∼65M vs. ∼125M) while achiev-ing the same stopping criterion, demonstrating that the pro-posed self-evolving memory tree improves both optimization efficiency and cross-repository knowledge transfer. 

5 Conclusion 

This paper presented ECAT, an entropy-guided adversarial framework for long-horizon Android-to-HarmonyOS repos-itory migration. By formulating repository migration as an entropy minimization problem, ECAT iteratively reduces repository disorder through adversarial interaction between an independent generator and discriminator, while contin-uously improving via a self-evolving memory tree that ac-cumulates transferable migration knowledge. We also intro-duce A2H-RepoBench, the first benchmark for long-horizon Android-to-HarmonyOS repository migration, together with functional specifications and a unified evaluation protocol. Extensive experiments demonstrate that ECAT consistently outperforms existing LLM-based agentic methods on large-scale real-world repositories. Despite these promising results, ECAT still has several limitations. The iterative adversarial optimization inevitably increases inference latency and token consumption compared with one-shot migration. Future work will investigate more efficient optimization strategies and the extension of ECAT to broader repository-level software engineering tasks. 

References 

Agarwal, S.; Zhang, Z.; Yuan, L.; Han, J.; and Peng, H. 2026. The unreasonable effectiveness of entropy minimization in llm reasoning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 38: 107150–107180. AntennaPod Contributors. 2026. AntennaPod. https://github. com/AntennaPod/AntennaPod. GitHub repository, accessed July 2026. Chen, M.; Tworek, J.; Jun, H.; Yuan, Q.; de Oliveira Pinto, H. P.; Kaplan, J.; Edwards, H.; Burda, Y.; Joseph, N.; Brock-man, G.; et al. 2021. Evaluating Large Language Models Trained on Code. arXiv:2107.03374. Chen, X.; Lin, M.; Schärli, N.; and Zhou, D. 2024. Teaching large language models to self-debug. In International Con-ference on Learning Representations , volume 2024, 8746– 8825. Dong, G.; Song, X.; Hu, Y.; Jin, J.; Zhang, C.; Chen, Y.; Li, X.; Yuan, H.; Yang, X.; Wen, T.; Tan, J.; Qian, H.; Huang, S.; Lu, J.; Li, Z.; Zhong, W.; Zhu, Y.; Chua, T.-S.; Dou, Z.; and Wen, J.-R. 2026. Towards Long-Horizon Agents: A Survey. 

Preprints .Gong, L.; Wang, C.; Cui, D.; Huang, Y.; and Wei, M. 2025. UITrans: Seamless UI Translation from Android to Har-monyOS. In Proceedings of the 16th International Con-ference on Internetware , 142–146. Goodfellow, I. J.; Pouget-Abadie, J.; Mirza, M.; Xu, B.; Warde-Farley, D.; Ozair, S.; Courville, A.; and Bengio, Y. 2014. Generative Adversarial Nets. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS) .Hong, S.; Zhuge, M.; Chen, J.; Zheng, X.; Cheng, Y.; Wang, J.; Zhang, C.; Yau, S.; Lin, Z.; Zhou, L.; et al. 2024. MetaGPT: Meta programming for a multi-agent collabora-tive framework. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2024, 23247–23275. Huang, D.; Zhang, J. M.; Luck, M.; Bu, Q.; Qing, Y.; and Cui, H. 2023. AgentCoder: Multi-Agent-based Code Generation with Iterative Testing and Optimisation. arXiv:2312.13010. Huang, J.; Chen, X.; Mishra, S.; Zheng, H. S.; Yu, A.; Song, X.; and Zhou, D. 2024. Large language models cannot self-correct reasoning yet. In International conference on learn-ing representations , volume 2024, 32808–32824. Ibrahimzada, A. R.; Ke, K.; Pawagi, M.; Abid, M. S.; Pan, R.; Sinha, S.; and Jabbarvand, R. 2025. AlphaTrans: A Neuro-Symbolic Compositional Approach for Repository-Level Code Translation and Validation. Proceedings of the ACM on Software Engineering , 2(FSE): 2454–2476. Ibrahimzada, A. R.; Paulsen, B.; Kroening, D.; and Jabbar-vand, R. 2026. ReCodeAgent: A Multi-Agent Workflow for Language-Agnostic Translation and Validation of Large-Scale Repositories. arXiv:2604.07341. Jiang, C.; Zhong, J.; Fu, Y.; Tian, K.; Yang, J.; Zhao, K.; Wang, Y.; Luo, T.; Wang, W.; Zuo, Y.; Jia, G.; Lv, X.; Lei, D.; Zeng, S.; Wang, Y.; Yuan, Z.; Long, X.; Hua, E.; Ren, C.; Jiang, X.; Xie, S.; Zheng, Y.; Sun, Y.; Qi, B.; Ding, N.; Zhang, K.; and Zhou, B. 2026. Self-Improving Agents in the Era of Experience: A Survey of Self- to Meta-Evolution. 

OpenReview Archive .Jimenez, C. E.; Yang, J.; Wettig, A.; Yao, S.; Pei, K.; Press, O.; and Narasimhan, K. 2024. SWE-bench: Can Language Models Resolve Real-World GitHub Issues? International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Li, R.; Allal, L. B.; Zi, Y.; Muennighoff, N.; Kocetkov, D.; Mou, C.; Marone, M.; Akiki, C.; Li, J.; Chim, J.; et al. 2023. StarCoder: may the source be with you! Trans. Mach. Learn. Res. 

Liu, N. F.; Lin, K.; Hewitt, J.; Paranjape, A.; Bevilacqua, M.; Petroni, F.; and Liang, P. 2024a. Lost in the middle: How language models use long contexts. Transactions of the association for computational linguistics , 12: 157–173. Liu, R.; Lin, Y.; Hu, Y.; Zhang, Z.; and Gao, X. 2024b. LLM-Based Java Concurrent Program to ArkTS Converter. In Proceedings of the 39th IEEE/ACM International Confer-ence on Automated Software Engineering , 2403–2406. Madaan, A.; Tandon, N.; Gupta, P.; Hallinan, S.; Gao, L.; Wiegreffe, S.; Alon, U.; Dziri, N.; Prabhumoye, S.; Yang, Y.; et al. 2023. Self-refine: Iterative refinement with self-feedback. Advances in neural information processing sys-tems , 36: 46534–46594. McHenry, C. 2026. CodeGraph. https://github.com/ colbymchenry/codegraph. GitHub repository, accessed July 2026. Meshtastic Contributors. 2026. Meshtastic Android. https:// github.com/meshtastic/Meshtastic-Android. GitHub reposi-tory, accessed July 2026. Packer, C.; Wooders, S.; Lin, K.; Fang, V.; Patil, S. G.; Stoica, I.; and Gonzalez, J. E. 2023. MemGPT: Towards LLMs as Operating Systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08560 .Park, J. S.; O’Brien, J.; Cai, C. J.; Morris, M. R.; Liang, P.; and Bernstein, M. S. 2023. Generative agents: Interac-tive simulacra of human behavior. In Proceedings of the 36th annual acm symposium on user interface software and technology , 1–22. Qian, C.; Liu, W.; Liu, H.; Chen, N.; Dang, Y.; Li, J.; Yang, C.; Chen, W.; Su, Y.; Cong, X.; Xu, J.; Li, D.; Liu, Z.; and Sun, M. 2024. ChatDev: Communicative Agents for Software Development. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) , 15174–15186. Rozière, B.; Gehring, J.; Gloeckle, F.; Sootla, S.; Gat, I.; Tan, X. E.; Adi, Y.; Liu, J.; Sauvestre, R.; Remez, T.; et al. 2023. Code Llama: Open Foundation Models for Code. arXiv:2308.12950. Shinn, N.; Cassano, F.; Gopinath, A.; Narasimhan, K.; and Yao, S. 2023. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal re-inforcement learning. Advances in neural information pro-cessing systems , 36: 8634–8652. Simple Mobile Tools. 2023. Simple Gallery. https://github. com/SimpleMobileTools/Simple-Gallery. GitHub reposi-tory, accessed July 2026. Wang, D.; Shelhamer, E.; Liu, S.; Olshausen, B.; and Dar-rell, T. 2021. Tent: Fully Test-Time Adaptation by Entropy Minimization. In International Conference on Learning Rep-resentations .Wang, G.; Xie, Y.; Jiang, Y.; Mandlekar, A.; Xiao, C.; Zhu, Y.; Fan, L.; and Anandkumar, A. 2023. Voyager: An Open-Ended Embodied Agent with Large Language Mod-els. In Intrinsically-Motivated and Open-Ended Learning Workshop @NeurIPS2023 .Wang, X.; Li, B.; Song, Y.; Xu, F. F.; Tang, X.; Zhuge, M.; Pan, J.; Song, Y.; Li, B.; Singh, J.; Tran, H. H.; Li, F.; Ma, R.; Zheng, M.; Qian, B.; Shao, D.; Muennighoff, N.; Zhang, Y.; Hui, B.; Lin, J.; Brennan, R.; Peng, H.; Ji, H.; and Neubig, G. 2025. OpenHands: An Open Platform for AI Software Developers as Generalist Agents. In International Conference on Learning Representations .Wang, Y.; Wang, Y.; Wang, S.; Guo, D.; Chen, J.; Grundy, J.; Liu, X.; Ma, Y.; Mao, M.; Zhang, H.; and Zheng, Z. 2026. RepoTransBench: A Real-World Multilingual Benchmark for Repository-Level Code Translation. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , 52(2): 675–690. Xia, C. S.; Deng, Y.; Dunn, S.; and Zhang, L. 2024. Agentless: Demystifying LLM-based Software Engineering Agents. arXiv:2407.01489. Xie, B.; Zhang, S.; Peng, Z.; Chen, W.; Ying, C.; and Luo, Y. 2026. ArkEval: Benchmarking and Evaluating Automated Code Repair for ArkTS. arXiv:2602.08866. Yang, J.; Jimenez, C. E.; Wettig, A.; Lieret, K.; Yao, S.; Narasimhan, K. R.; and Press, O. 2024. SWE-agent: Agent-Computer Interfaces Enable Automated Software Engineer-ing. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural In-formation Processing Systems .Yao, S.; Zhao, J.; Yu, D.; Du, N.; Shafran, I.; Narasimhan, K.; and Cao, Y. 2023. ReAct: Synergizing Reasoning and Acting in Language Models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations .Yuksekgonul, M.; Bianchi, F.; Boen, J.; Liu, S.; Huang, Z.; Guestrin, C.; and Zou, J. 2024. TextGrad: Automatic “Dif-ferentiation” via Text. arXiv:2406.07496. Zhang, X.; Wen, J.; Yang, F.; Kang, Y.; Zhao, P.; Wang, J.; Wang, M.; Huang, Y.; Fu, S.; Nallipogu, E.; Lin, Q.; Dang, Y.; Rajmohan, S.; and Zhang, D. 2025. Skeleton-Guided-Translation: A Benchmarking Framework for Code Repos-itory Translation with Fine-Grained Quality Evaluation. In 

Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 , 18187–18198. Association for Computational Linguistics. Zhang, Y.; Ruan, H.; Fan, Z.; and Roychoudhury, A. 2024. Autocoderover: Autonomous program improvement. In Pro-ceedings of the 33rd ACM SIGSOFT International Sympo-sium on Software Testing and Analysis , 1592–1604. Zheng, K.; Xue, P.; Yang, Z.; Lyu, X.; Lai, P.; Zhao, M.; Tang, Y.; Zhang, H.; Li, X.; Wu, L.; and Wang, C. 2026a. Porting Declarative UI to HarmonyOS: A Heuristic-guided LLM Approach. arXiv:2606.07085. Zheng, L.; Chiang, W.-L.; Sheng, Y.; Zhuang, S.; Wu, Z.; Zhuang, Y.; Lin, Z.; Li, Z.; Li, D.; Xing, E.; et al. 2023. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena. Ad-vances in neural information processing systems , 36: 46595– 46623. Zheng, Y.; Zhang, Z.; Ma, C.; Yu, Y.; Zhu, J.; Wu, Y.; Xu, T.; Dong, B.; Zhu, H.; Huang, R.; et al. 2026b. Skill-router: Skill routing for llm agents at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.22455 .Zhuge, M.; Zhao, C.; Ashley, D. R.; Wang, W.; Khizbullin, D.; Xiong, Y.; Liu, Z.; Chang, E.; Krishnamoorthi, R.; Tian, Y.; et al. 2025. Agent-as-a-Judge: Evaluate Agents with Agents. In International Conference on Machine Learning ,80569–80611. PMLR. 

A Additional Results 

A.1 Effect of the Independent Discriminator 

To directly verify that decoupling generation from evalua-tion is essential, we evaluate a w/o Discriminator variant in which a single agent both updates and evaluates the repos-itory within a shared context. This variant retains the full skill library. As shown in Table 2, removing the indepen-dent discriminator collapses the average score (unweighted over the three repositories) from 74.7% to 28.4%, a larger degradation than removing any other component, and the fail-ure amplifies with repository scale. On Gallery, the smallest repository, the variant still completes 104 of 323 features in full, but both metrics drop by roughly 40 points as a third of the features are left missing. On AntennaPod, the degradation shifts from missing features to shallow ones: 106 of 184 features are judged Partial while only 5 remain Full, indicating that the agent touches most features but stops before completing them. On Meshtastic, the largest repos-itory, the variant collapses almost entirely, with only 7 of 129 features fully functional and 105 missing. Inspecting the optimization trajectories, we observe that the self-evaluating agent systematically overestimates the quality of its own out-puts and triggers the stopping criterion prematurely, which explains this scale-dependent pattern: on small repositories premature stopping leaves a partial migration, whereas on large repositories it halts long before the long-horizon opti-mization can cover the feature space. These results provide direct evidence for the self-confirmation bias: without an independent evaluator, the challenge-and-repair loop degen-erates into self-refinement and loses the ability to sustain long-horizon optimization. 

A.2 Migration Cost and Base-LLM Analysis 

Table 3 reports the cost of ECAT across the three reposito-ries. Iterations, wall-clock time, and token consumption all grow with repository scale, roughly tripling from Gallery Repository Method Align Agent F/P/M Gallery ECAT 84.9 85.6 256/42/26 w/o Discriminator 46.7 45.5 104/86/133 AntennaPod ECAT 69.5 74.7 125/26/34 w/o Discriminator 23.7 31.5 5/106/73 Meshtastic ECAT 62.0 71.2 79/26/24 w/o Discriminator 10.7 12.0 7/17/105 

Table 2: Ablation of the independent discriminator. In the w/o Discriminator variant, a single agent both generates and evaluates the repository within a shared context, with access to the same skill library as ECAT. F/P/M denotes the number of features judged Full/Partial/Missing by Agent-as-Judge. Repository LOC Iterations Time (h) Tokens (M) Gallery 50K 38 ∼12 ∼65 AntennaPod 120K 95 ∼29 ∼180 Meshtastic 300K 126 ∼44 ∼230 Table 3: Migration cost of ECAT across repositories using DeepSeek-V4-Pro. Tokens are cumulative and exclude cache hits; wall-clock time includes emulator-based dynamic en-tropy evaluation.                     

> Base LLM Align Agent Iters. Time (h) Tokens (M) DS-V4-Pro 84.9 85.6 38 ∼12 ∼65 DS-V4-Flash 78.7 87.1 89 ∼24 ∼146 GLM-5.2 86.7 88.1 29 ∼27 ∼46

Table 4: ECAT with different base LLMs on the Gallery repository. Quality (%) is evaluated by Node Alignment and Agent-as-Judge; cost is reported as iterations, wall-clock time, and cumulative tokens. “DS” means DeepSeek. (50K LOC) to Meshtastic (300K LOC), which reflects the long-horizon nature of the task rather than a limitation spe-cific to ECAT: each additional 100K LOC introduces more cross-file dependencies for the discriminator to audit and more defects for the generator to repair. Table 4 further eval-uates ECAT with different base LLMs on Gallery. ECAT is robust to the choice of base model: all three LLMs reach comparable final quality (83–89% Agent), indicating that the adversarial entropy-minimization loop, rather than the raw capability of a single model, drives migration quality. The base model instead determines the cost profile, where per-step reliability and inference speed trade off. The weaker but fastest DeepSeek-V4-Flash requires 2.3× more iterations and tokens than DeepSeek-V4-Pro, as each individual repair is less reliable and more defects survive to subsequent rounds; nevertheless, it still converges to slightly higher functional quality, showing that the acceptance criterion in Eq. (6) com-pensates for weaker per-step generation through more opti-mization rounds. Conversely, GLM-5.2 produces the most reliable per-step repairs, converging in the fewest iterations and tokens with the best overall quality, but its slowest in-ference speed yields the highest wall-clock time despite the fewest rounds. 

A.3 Entropy Dimensions and Weights 

Table 5 details the K=14 entropy dimensions, grouped into static entropy (evaluated without execution) and dy-namic entropy (runtime behavior on the HarmonyOS em-ulator). All dimensions measure generic migration de-fects against the Android source repository and involve no application-specific feature checklist, consistent with the isolation stated in Sec. 4.1. We assign wi=0 .3 to five dimensions whose defects block or silently break en-tire features ( compile , entry_nav , feature_check ,

data_layer_parity , permission_parity ) and 

wi=0 .1 to the rest. The weights primarily govern repair prioritization in the text gradient and they also rescale the aggregated entropy in Eq. (2), so the stopping threshold ϵ

should be calibrated jointly with the weight configuration. ECAT is insensitive to the exact weight values: setting all weights uniformly to 0.1 on Gallery yields 73.3% Align and 83.4% Agent, close to the default configuration (84.9% / 85.6%), with functional quality largely preserved. 

A.4 Additional Qualitative UI Comparisons 

AntennaPod is shown in the main paper. Figure 6 groups the remaining Gallery and Meshtastic comparisons. To ensure comparability, all methods are captured under the same ap-plication state. Gallery is shown in the empty-media state and Meshtastic in the disconnected-device state, which are the entry screens a user encounters on first launch without granted media access or a paired device. On Gallery, ECAT reproduces the Android entry state, including the search bar, the view-mode controls, the empty-state message, and the actionable “Change filters” link. The w/o Dynamic Entropy variant preserves the overall layout but exhibits rendering defects invisible to static verification, such as a broken title bar. Among the baselines, ReCodeAgent renders a structurally plausible but simplified shell. Repo-TransAgent reconnects the entry to a folder grid that does not correspond to the Android empty state. OpenHands falls back to a generic placeholder layout with misrendered thumbnails. On Meshtastic, ECAT preserves the connection workflow of the Android original. The transport tabs for Bluetooth, Net-work, and USB, the no-device placeholder, the scan affor-dance, and the bottom navigation are all present and cor-rectly wired. The w/o Dynamic Entropy variant retains most controls but introduces runtime-only defects, including mis-placed permission banners and an unstyled scan section. The baselines degrade more severely. ReCodeAgent and Repo-TransAgent collapse the transport tabs into a single scan button, and OpenHands renders a static connect card whose controls are not reachable from the migrated navigation. Consistent with the AntennaPod comparison in the main paper, the gap between ECAT and its w/o Dynamic Entropy variant comes mainly from rendering and interaction defects rather than missing features. This explains why the static Agent-as-Judge scores understate the practical impact of dy-namic entropy. These screenshots are qualitative evidence Category Dimension Description Estimator wi

Static 

compile Whether the migrated repository compiles Rule 0.30 

static_lint Untranslated Android idioms and ArkTS anti-patterns Rule 0.10 

style Coding-style violations (naming, console , px , var , etc.) Rule 0.10 

placeholder Unfinished stubs: TODOs, placeholders, template text Rule 0.10 

app_identity Package name, vendor, version, and icon left as template de-faults Rule 0.10 

data_layer_parity Data-layer completeness against Android database tables, en-tities, and settings keys Rule 0.30 

permission_parity Each Android permission mapped to its HarmonyOS equiva-lent Rule 0.30 

page_audit Per-page shell detection via code volume and interaction den-sity LLM 0.10 

feature_check Per-feature completeness against the Android counterpart LLM 0.30 

hallucination Fabricated functionality absent from the Android source LLM 0.10 

entry_nav Navigation reachability: unregistered routes, dead tabs, empty entries LLM 0.30 

source_parity File-level 1:1 accounting of Android sources, exposing miss-ing files and fake implementations LLM 0.10 Dynamic ui_align Screenshot-level UI consistency scored by a multimodal judge LLM 0.10 

runtime_liveness Cold-start liveness and smoke-click probing on the emulator Rule 0.10 Table 5: Entropy dimensions of Code Entropy. Each dimension ei is estimated by a dedicated verifier and aggregated via Eq. (2) with weight wi. All dimensions are defined at the level of generic migration defects against the Android source repository and contain no application-specific functional requirements. “Rule” denotes deterministic rule-based verification; “LLM” denotes agentic (multimodal) LLM judging. recorded separately from Agent-as-Judge and Node Align-ment and do not change either score. 

A.5 Generated HarmonyOS Artifact Size 

Table 6 compares the size of the final HarmonyOS/ArkTS repositories. “ETS files” counts .ets source files and “ETS lines” sums their physical lines. These are descriptive statis-tics that contribute to neither reported metric, but they cor-roborate the failure modes discussed in the main paper. Open-Hands and RepoTransAgent produce only 2K–6K lines re-gardless of source scale, consistent with self-terminating af-ter migrating a thin shell. ReCodeAgent generates far more code, even exceeding ECAT in file count on Gallery and Meshtastic, yet scores much lower on Agent-as-Judge, indi-cating that its volume is inflated by structurally faithful but shallowly implemented classes. ECAT is the only method whose artifact size scales with the source repository, from 34K lines on Gallery to 173K on Meshtastic. 

B Reproducibility Protocol 

B.1 Migration Inputs and Isolation 

Each baseline adapter exposes a read-only Android reposi-tory and initializes a writable target workspace from a min-imal HarmonyOS/ArkTS project scaffold. The scaffold pro-vides project and module configuration, an entry ability, and a placeholder page, but no migrated application behavior. The Android repository is the sole source of application behavior, and the objective is an end-to-end repository mi-gration rather than implementation of a checklist-selected                           

> Repository Method ETS files ETS lines
> Gallery ECAT 82 33,930 OpenHands 27 2,568 RepoTransAgent 22 5,625 ReCodeAgent 108 9,468 AntennaPod ECAT 423 94,569 OpenHands 25 4,582 RepoTransAgent 14 3,799 ReCodeAgent 315 58,124 Meshtastic ECAT 464 172,661 OpenHands 101 6,380 RepoTransAgent 12 4,174 ReCodeAgent 777 111,952

Table 6: Size of the generated HarmonyOS/ArkTS artifacts by repository and method. subset. Feature checklists are withheld during migration and are used only for post-hoc evaluation. Build feedback is avail-able through hvigorw assembleHap . Build success is execution feedback and is not included in either reported metric. All selected baseline runs use DeepSeek-V4-Pro through the one-million-token context endpoint. Prompt reuse fol-lows each method’s native interface. ReCodeAgent uses one shared four-role template with a per-application run configuration. OpenHands instantiates one repository-agent task template with source-derived application scope. Repo-Android ECAT ECAT w/o Dynamic Entropy ReCodeAgent RepoTransAgent OpenHands Android ECAT ECAT w/o Dynamic Entropy ReCodeAgent RepoTransAgent OpenHands Figure 6: Qualitative UI comparisons. Top: Gallery in the same empty-media state. Bottom: Meshtastic in the disconnected-device state. In both panels, columns show Android, ECAT, ECAT w/o Dynamic Entropy, ReCodeAgent, RepoTransAgent, and OpenHands from left to right. ECAT retains the principal source-visible controls and entry states, while the baseline screens omit, simplify, or reconnect several of them. TransAgent uses one static contract deterministically aug-mented with repository structure, a grouped source inven-tory, selected source excerpts, a scaffold summary, and its interaction grammar. Across methods, the prompts define the same end-to-end migration objective, source-access pol-icy, anti-placeholder requirements, and build criterion, while application-specific scope is derived from the Android source rather than from the evaluation checklist. 

B.2 Baseline Implementations 

ReCodeAgent. We preserve the four-role workflow of Re-CodeAgent: Analyzer , Planning , Translator , and Validator .The Analyzer inspects the complete Android repository and produces source and target-design documents. The Plan-ning agent maps source and resource groups to concrete ArkTS paths. The Translator implements the plan, and the Validator checks repository coverage, placeholders, platform residue, and build health. The Translator and Validator alter-nate for at most five iterations and stop early when validation passes. ReCodeAgent’s original executable-test validation is not directly available for Android-to-HarmonyOS migration. Therefore, our language-pair adaptation uses the real Har-monyOS build together with static repository coverage and placeholder checks. The same four role templates are used for all repositories. 

OpenHands. We run OpenHands SDK 1.21.0 in head-less, non-interactive mode. The general CodeAct/ReAct-style agent can inspect the source, edit the target repository, invoke shell commands, and iterate on compiler feedback. It is not assigned a fixed action budget; a run terminates when the agent emits its completion action. The prompt requires a source-derived migration inventory, a real entry flow, regis-tered pages, non-UI subsystems, preserved application iden-tity, and a successful HarmonyOS build. App-specific sub-system names are included only to make the source-derived scope explicit. 

RepoTransAgent. We instantiate the repository-level Re-Act agent released with RepoTransBench. This is a sin-gle agent, not a collaborative multi-agent system. We re-tain its five-action interface: ReadFile , CreateFile ,

ExecuteCommand , SearchContent , and Finished .For the Android-to-HarmonyOS language pair, the prompt materializer supplies a deterministic Android repository tree, source inventory, selected source samples, and the initial Har-monyOS scaffold tree. The translation phase has a budget of 300 actions. Compiler diagnostics are then returned in up to five repair rounds of 60 actions each, for a maximum budget of 600 actions. Build success is feedback rather than an automatic stop: each phase terminates when the agent emits Finished , exhausts its action budget, or hits the phase timeout. In the recorded Gallery run, no phase emitted 

Finished , all 600 actions were used, and the repair phase ended with a successful build. 

C Evaluation Details 

C.1 Inputs and Source Grounding 

The released a2h-evaluate skill accepts exactly three inputs: the read-only Android repository, one read-only migrated HarmonyOS repository, and the original feature checklist. The evaluator model is recorded as execution meta-data rather than treated as a fourth input. The selected check-list contains 323 behaviors for Gallery, 184 for AntennaPod, and 129 for Meshtastic. The launcher first checks its local prerequisites, finger-prints the three inputs and all evaluation components, nor-malizes the raw checklist into stable feature rows, and creates or resumes content-addressed state. A previously generated contract is not accepted as an input. Resume is permitted only when the input and protocol fingerprints match; a mismatch is a hard failure, while an already verified prefix is preserved after interruption. Before any HarmonyOS target file is inspected, each nor-malized row is grounded independently in the Android repos-itory. The evaluator checks a valid source hint first and oth-erwise searches repository-relative paths, resources, control names, feature tokens, and hierarchy tokens. It traces each feature from a concrete UI, route, lifecycle callback, handler, service, wrapper, or dependency boundary through a mini-mal precondition and a named action or render event to the essential observable outcome. Every row receives the small-est concrete Android path:line anchor and one source basis: Exact when app code directly supports the whole behavior, or Boundary when a concrete app boundary sup-ports the feature but the checklist names a finer detail not directly encoded there. Related rows may reuse an anchor but retain distinct identities, and no selected row is removed from the evaluation scope. After all rows are drafted, the evaluator audits row identity, anchors, numeric values, and behavior boundaries; corrections are allowed only before the reference is explicitly sealed. Sealing makes the source ref-erence immutable and records its hash, after which target judgment and alignment may begin. 

C.2 Agent-as-Judge 

For each sealed source behavior, the evaluator inspects the corresponding HarmonyOS implementation and assigns ex-actly one status: Full indicates that static code coherently implements the essential feature intent, including its princi-pal action, observable outcome, and a statically evidenced integration path, such as a registered route, invocation, call-back, lifecycle hook, exported ability, or service. Runtime proof and the exact Android UI structure are not required. Partial indicates that substantive code implements a mean-ingful part of the same intent, but integration is uncertain, or an essential action, outcome, state or data flow, or named subflow is incomplete, disconnected, mocked, or materially degraded. Missing indicates that no substantive implemen-tation of the named behavior exists. The evaluator assigns the strongest status supported by concrete static evidence. Platform-native alternatives and equivalent behavior on a different screen or navigation struc-ture are accepted. A substantive but disconnected imple-mentation is Partial, whereas names, comments, declara-tions, interfaces, constants, placeholders, empty callbacks, hard-coded demonstrations, mocks, boilerplate, and UI shells without the behavior are Missing. Static presentation counts only when the checklist row itself defines a display or in-formation feature. One implementation may satisfy multi-ple rows only when it independently implements each row’s essential behavior. Differences in naming, architecture, UI structure, or the absence of runtime confirmation do not by themselves cause a downgrade. Full and Partial judgments require concrete repository-relative path:line target anchors. Missing requires 

target_anchor=NOT_FOUND and a rationale describ-ing the relevant target area searched. For Partial, the ratio-nale identifies both the implemented portion and the decisive remaining gap. All checklist rows remain in the denominator. The score is 

Agent = NFull + 0 .5NPartial 

NFull + NPartial + NMissing 

.

C.3 Node Alignment 

Node Alignment is executed only after the Android source reference has been sealed. The launcher verifies the hashes and versions of the bundled alignment tool (CodeGraph 1.4+ and its runtime) and fails rather than substituting another ex-tractor. Each repository is copied into an indexing workspace with build and dependency directories excluded, then parsed by CodeGraph into a shared SQLite schema covering class, interface, struct, function, method, file, and enum nodes with contains, calls, instantiates, extends, implements, and refer-ences edges; instantiation is treated as a call relation, and an ArkTS class’s inheritance relations are back-filled from its declaration only when CodeGraph has not emitted them. 

Platform-agnostic abstraction. Both extracted graphs are independently abstracted into the same platform-agnostic se-mantic graph (PASG). Only architectural entities become PASG nodes, classified by deterministic platform rules into Screen, DataSource, StateContainer, EventHandler, BackgroundTask, Transformer, and Gateway; file- and function-level entities serve as extraction context or edge carriers. Calls and instantiations are lifted to their enclosing architectural entities, and contains, call, and inheritance rela-tions are converted into platform-agnostic edges (renders, triggers, observes, delegates, schedules, transforms, propagates), with duplicates removed. 

Platform-friction filtering. The Android retention de-nominator is counted before PASG node filtering, minus only logged platform-friction entities that require no HarmonyOS counterpart because the declarative UI and runtime subsume them (e.g., view-binding glue, BroadcastReceiver s, 

AsyncTask s, RecyclerView view holders, app-widget providers, and platform-specific image libraries). Irreducible platform differences therefore neither inflate nor depress the metric. 

Matching. An automatic bootstrap first derives one-to-one cross-platform name mappings from class enti-ties: exact-name matches, then deterministic suffix map-pings (Activity →Page , Fragment →Component ,

Service →Ability , Receiver →Handler ), then token-Jaccard matches above 0.45 . For every source–target PASG node pair, the matcher combines token Jaccard, synonym-expanded Jaccard, and character-prefix overlap into a name similarity, treating bootstrapped mappings as near-exact; cross-type pairs require a strong lexical match, and sharing the same original platform type adds a small bonus. Pairs above the frozen threshold θ = 0 .30 become candidates, which are sorted by decreasing similarity (ties broken by identifiers) and matched by deterministic greedy one-to-one assignment, yielding a reproducible matched set 

M . A subsequent structural-refinement pass rescales retained pair scores but removes no pair and does not affect the metric. 

Score. With Ds the pre-filter Android retention denomina-tor and M the final matched set, 

Align = |M |

Ds

.

The finalizer re-hashes all inputs and evaluation components, rejects any threshold change or alignment failure, and emits the two scores independently; each “Avg.” cell is the un-weighted arithmetic mean over the three applications. D Baseline Prompt Examples 

The listing below reproduces the path-sanitized Gallery prompts and reports the corresponding recorded execution flow for the three baselines. Runtime controls and resume events are labeled separately from text sent to the models. We omit only concrete paths, internal artifact filenames, complete repository and target trees, source inventories and excerpts, scaffold metadata, and long generic action examples; bracketed notes mark these omissions. The prompt bodies retain the recorded role, task, and materialized system instructions as follows. 

PROMPT EXAMPLE -- OpenHands [Recorded execution flow; not part of the task prompt] The task below was supplied once to OpenHands SDK in headless mode. The agent then inspected the source, edited the target, used shell/build feedback, and terminated with its native Finish action after a successful build. No fixed action budget was imposed. [Redaction convention] Concrete directory paths are replaced by semantic repository names. TASK PROMPT You are an expert in migrating Android applications to HarmonyOS (ArkTS / ArkUI). Working directory layout: - [ANDROID SOURCE] - the source Android app (Kotlin). READ-ONLY reference; do NOT modify it. - [HARMONY TARGET] - a HarmonyOS ArkTS project scaffold. Write your translation HERE. Goal: Translate the Android app into a functionally-equivalent HarmonyOS ArkTS app inside [HARMONY TARGET], reusing the existing scaffold. Scope & completeness (IMPORTANT - translate the WHOLE app, not a core subset): The app’s screens are the Android Activities - every Activity except the abstract base SimpleActivity. For EACH screen Activity, create a corresponding ArkTS page, register it in the page configuration, and wire navigation to it. Also translate the supporting models, adapters/components, dialogs and helpers those screens depend on. Do NOT stop at the "core" screens - the migration is complete only when EVERY screen Activity has a corresponding page. Build & verify: hvigorw assembleHap --no-daemon -p product=default Fix compilation errors iteratively until the build succeeds. Definition of success (all required): 1. Every screen Activity has a corresponding registered ArkTS page. 2. The Harmony project builds (BUILD SUCCESSFUL). 3. The app launches into its real home screen: the entry ability loads the real home page (not the placeholder), with the other screens reachable from it. Start by listing ALL Activity source files to enumerate the screens, then translate every one, then build and fix errors. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------PROMPT EXAMPLE -- RepoTransAgent [Recorded execution flow; not part of the system prompts] RepoTransAgent first ran one TRANSLATE phase with a 300-action limit. It then ran five REPAIR phases, each with a 60-action limit, over the same evolving target. Every repair phase used the same repair system prompt. At each turn the harness appended deterministic progress state and the latest build diagnostics. The recorded run used all 600 actions; the final repair phase ended with a successful build. [Materialized context omitted] The complete Android repository tree, deterministic source inventory, selected source excerpts, initial/current HarmonyOS target tree, concrete file paths, and long generic action examples are omitted. They were present in the actual materialized prompts. TRANSLATE SYSTEM PROMPT You are RepoTransAgent translating the entire Android repository for simple-gallery into a launchable HarmonyOS ArkTS application. ## Execution phase translate Source reads use source://relative/path. Relative write paths resolve inside the HarmonyOS target root. The Android source is read-only. The feature checklist and evaluator outputs are not available to you. ## End-to-end migration contract Migrate the complete Android repository into the HarmonyOS project. The Android repository is the source of truth. Cover the launcher and app identity, UI and navigation, domain behavior, persistence, network/platform services, background work, resources, permissions, and build configuration that exist in the source. Do not stop at a demo shell or only the visible home screen. Do not create mock data architecture, TODO/FIXME placeholders, empty handlers, or hard-coded success paths. Where Android and HarmonyOS differ, implement the closest concrete ArkTS behavior and preserve externally visible semantics. ## Translation phase Work through the complete source inventory in coherent repository slices. Keep the launcher, domain, storage, network/platform, resource, and UI/navigation parts connected. Do not spend repeated turns re-reading the same file when a concrete source path or group from the inventory can be advanced instead. Inspect source files as needed with ReadFile(source://...), implement directly in the target scaffold, and build frequently with ./run_tests .sh. Every page must be registered and reachable from the real entry flow. Finished(success) is valid only after a successful build following the latest target change and after the placeholder entry has been replaced by the migrated application. ## Response format Respond with exactly one ReAct step: Thought: [brief reasoning] Action: [one valid action] No text may appear outside Thought and Action. ## Available actions CreateFile(filepath="relative/path"): Create a complete translated implementation. Implement full functionality based on source-code analysis, not an empty stub. ReadFile(filepath="relative/path") Read a source or current target implementation needed for translation, verification, or debugging. ExecuteCommand(command="shell command") Execute commands for build, testing, and verification. SearchContent(keyword="search term") Search within generated target files. Finished(status="success|failed") Mark the task complete. Use success only after verifying the latest target build. Start by reading the launcher/entry source and its immediate dependencies, then implement the corresponding real HarmonyOS entry flow. REPAIR SYSTEM PROMPT: PHASE-SPECIFIC PART ## Execution phase repair ## Repair phase The target contains the output of an earlier translation phase. Start from the current target and the latest compiler diagnostics. Repair concrete build or integration errors first. Do not restart the migration, replace working code with a demo, or declare success while the latest target change is unbuilt. The end-to-end migration contract, source policy, build and completion requirements, materialized repository context, response format, and five-action interface are otherwise the same as in the TRANSLATE system prompt. [Per-turn harness input] Continue the Android-to-HarmonyOS migration in the repair phase. Inspect the existing target only as needed, fix the latest concrete build or integration problems, and keep advancing the repository instead of restarting it. The harness then appended current iteration counts, source/target coverage, recent actions, current target files, build status, and compiler diagnostics. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------PROMPT EXAMPLE -- ReCodeAgent [Recorded execution flow; not part of a role prompt] ReCodeAgent invoked the four roles as separate agents: Analyzer -> Planning -> Translator <-> Validator. The run allowed at most five Translator-Validator iterations and stopped when the Validator produced PASS. The recorded Gallery run completed Analyzer, Planning, and the first Translator before a phase-boundary interruption. It resumed from the first Validator without changing the role templates or wrapper, then ran three additional Translator-Validator repair cycles. The fourth Validator result was PASS. [Redaction convention] Concrete source, target, planning, and toolchain paths are omitted. Internal planning filenames are replaced by semantic artifact names. ANALYZER ROLE PROMPT # Android to HarmonyOS Repository Analysis Analyze the complete Android repository and design its HarmonyOS/ArkTS translation. Inspect the real repository with Read, Glob, and Grep. Cover every Kotlin source package, XML/resource family, manifest capability, dependency, and externally visible behavior. Do not use a feature checklist or ECAT judge. You MUST write both planning artifacts: 1. [SOURCE ANALYSIS], containing the complete source tree summary, activities, adapters, dialogs, services, models, persistence, permissions , media APIs, dependencies, and resources. 2. [TARGET DESIGN], containing the target ArkTS module structure, Android-to-Harmony API mappings, translation risks, unsupported capabilities, dependency order, and build strategy. Read enough source files to ground the documents. Finish only after both artifacts exist and contain substantive repository-level analysis. PLANNING ROLE PROMPT # Android to HarmonyOS Repository Translation Plan Read [SOURCE ANALYSIS] and [TARGET DESIGN], then inspect repository files needed to validate them. Plan the entire repository, not a selected feature subset. You MUST write [IMPLEMENTATION PLAN]. It must: - begin with a checklist of all translation units; - map every Android source/resource group to concrete ArkTS target paths; - order units by dependency; - specify Android-to-Harmony API and library mappings; - separate source implementation, resources/UI, persistence/media, and build-validation work; - require compilation after coherent batches; - contain no placeholders or deferred units. Finish only after the artifact exists and covers the complete repository. TRANSLATOR ROLE PROMPT # Android to HarmonyOS Repository Translation Execution Read [IMPLEMENTATION PLAN], [SOURCE ANALYSIS], and [TARGET DESIGN]. Execute every unchecked translation unit in dependency order. For each coherent source unit, use the source-translator-executor subagent. The subagent must inspect the corresponding Kotlin/XML source, implement real ArkTS under the target root, and preserve behavior. Do not leave TODOs, empty handlers, mocks, fake success paths, or disconnected demo screens. After each coherent batch, and at the end, run: hvigorw assembleHap --no-daemon -p product=default --stacktrace Fix all compilation errors. If [VALIDATION REPORT] exists, repair every listed issue before continuing. Do not read or use the ECAT final judge, feature score, or entropy output. Finish only after all plan items are checked and the final build succeeds. SOURCE-TRANSLATOR-EXECUTOR SUBAGENT PROMPT Translate only the source/resource unit assigned by the parent. Inspect the real Kotlin/XML files, implement complete ArkTS in the target, and avoid TODOs, stubs, mocks, and fake success paths. Preserve existing Harmony build configuration. Run the Harmony build when the assigned unit forms a compilable batch, fix errors caused by your changes, update the implementation-plan checklist for your unit, then terminate. VALIDATOR ROLE PROMPT # Android to HarmonyOS Repository Validation Read all planning documents and inspect the complete target repository. Use the validator subagents to check target structure, source-to-target coverage, missing behavior, stubs, TODOs, Android residue, identifier/API mismatches, and build health. Run: hvigorw assembleHap --no-daemon -p product=default --stacktrace If any issue exists, write [VALIDATION REPORT] with status FAIL and numbered, file-specific repairs. Remove any stale validation summary. Only when the project builds and no planned unit is missing may you write [VALIDATION SUMMARY] with status PASS. Do not modify target implementation files. STRUCTURE-VALIDATOR SUBAGENT PROMPT Compare [IMPLEMENTATION PLAN] and the Android repository against the Harmony target. Report missing files, missing units, disconnected UI, and wrong target locations. Do not modify target files. STUB-VALIDATOR SUBAGENT PROMPT Inspect all target ArkTS/resources for TODO, FIXME, placeholder, mock, empty handlers, hard-coded success, unimplemented behavior, and Android API residue. Report exact files and lines. Do not modify target files.