Title: Diversifying to Verify: When Task-Equivalent Programs Differ in Verifiability

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.09366v1

Published Time: Mon, 13 Jul 2026 01:25:51 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
# Diversifying to Verify: When Task-Equivalent Programs Differ in Verifiability 

Shirley Yu 1 and Ruben Martins 2 

> 1

Stanford University, shirleyyu0302@gmail.com  

> 2

Carnegie Mellon University, rubenm@andrew.cmu.edu 

Abstract. Program verification is crucial for software correctness, but producing fully verified programs remains difficult in practice. This paper studies whether implementation structure affects auto-mated verifiability when multiple generated programs are intended to satisfy the same task-level semantics. We present Diversify2Verify , a staged LLM-based pipeline for Why3 that infers representation-specific contracts, generates and tests di-verse recursive and imperative array/list implementations, and at-tempts verification with bounded verifier-guided annotation repair. We also construct a verification-oriented benchmark of 73 tasks over integers, arrays, and lists, yielding 292 implementation variants. Di-versify2Verify verifies 96 artifacts initially and 154 after two repair passes, improving artifact-level verification from 32.9% to 52.7%. At the task level, at least one variant verifies for 49 of 73 tasks, a 67.1% success rate. These results show that task-equivalent implementa-tions can differ substantially in verifiability and that implementation diversity helps find verification-friendly artifacts. 

Keywords: Program verification · Implementation diversity · Specifica-tion generation · Large language models · Why3 · Verifier-guided repair 

# 1 Introduction 

Large Language Models (LLMs) have become increasingly effective at synthe-sizing executable code from natural-language prompts [4]. Generating formally verified software, however, requires more than code that passes tests. In deduc-tive verification frameworks such as Why3 [7], a program must be paired with a formal semantic specification and proof guidance—including preconditions, postconditions, invariants, variants, assertions, helper predicates, and lemmas— sufficient for the verifier to prove correctness. This makes verified-code generation difficult to treat as ordinary code generation. Natural-language tasks are often ambiguous or incomplete, and concrete examples validate only particular input-output pairs. A model must therefore infer a mathematical specification [5,15], implement the algorithm [4,1,13], and synthesize the proof structure needed to connect the implementation to that specification [16,22]. In a one-shot approach, arXiv:2607.09366v1 [cs.SE] 10 Jul 2026 2 Yu and Martins 

these requirements are entangled. When verification fails, feedback is often am-biguous, and unconstrained repair may change the specification rather than the implementation or proof, yielding a program that verifies for the wrong reason. This paper asks whether implementation diversity can improve LLM-assisted deductive verification. Given multiple implementations intended to solve the same task, do different data representations and control structures lead to differ-ent verification outcomes? Can generating several variants increase the chance that at least one has a verification-friendly structure? We use task-equivalent 

to mean that variants are generated for the same benchmark task and verified against representation-specific contracts that are intended to express the same task-level semantics. We do not prove, as an additional theorem, that the array and list contracts are equivalent to each other. We introduce Diversify2Verify , a staged LLM-based pipeline for generating and verifying Why3 artifacts from programming tasks and examples. Diver-sify2Verify separates contract inference, implementation generation, and proof annotation. It first generates a representation-specific contract with helper def-initions and test lemmas derived from the examples, then freezes the accepted contract as the semantic target. It next generates executable WhyML candidates for the same task, varying representation and implementation style. Finally, it combines each tested implementation with the frozen contract and adds the annotations needed for Why3 verification. To evaluate this approach, we construct a verification-oriented benchmark from LeetCodeDataset [27]. Unlike standard code-generation benchmarks that primarily test executable behavior, our benchmark is designed to study deduc-tive verification and implementation diversity. We restrict attention to tasks over integers, arrays, and lists that admit formal contracts, support multiple plausi-ble implementations, and are suitable for SMT-backed reasoning. The resulting benchmark contains 73 tasks. For each task, Diversify2Verify generates four vari-ants, array-recursive, array-imperative, list-recursive, and list-imperative, yield-ing 292 final verification artifacts. Our evaluation shows that implementation structure substantially affects au-tomated verifiability. Of the 292 generated artifacts, 96 verify initially and 154 verify after two bounded, feedback-guided repair passes, yielding an artifact-level verification rate of 52.7%. At the task level, at least one variant verifies for 49 of the 73 tasks, for a success rate of 67.1%. The strongest individual family verifies 44 tasks, indicating that diversity provides a modest but measurable increase in task coverage. Overall, the results support our central hypothesis: task-equivalent implementations can differ in verifiability .This paper makes the following contributions: 

– A staged LLM pipeline for Why3. We present Diversify2Verify , which decomposes verified-code generation into contract inference, implementation generation, and proof annotation. 

– Diverse implementation generation. For each task, Diversify2Verify pro-duces recursive and imperative variants over array and list representations, enabling direct comparison of structurally different programs. Diversifying to Verify: When Task-Equivalent Programs Differ in Verifiability 3

– A verification-oriented benchmark. We construct a benchmark of 73 tasks over integers, arrays, and lists, with accepted representation-specific contracts and 292 generated implementation artifacts. We release the bench-mark, generated Why3 artifacts, and verification logs in a public repository available at https://github.com/forge-lab/Diversify2Verify .

– An empirical study of verifiability. We evaluate how verification success varies by representation and implementation style, quantify task-level gains from multiple variants, and analyze common remaining proof failures. 

# 2 Background: Why3 and Verification Challenges 

This section reviews the Why3 concepts used by Diversify2Verify and explains how representation and control structure shape proof obligations, causing task-equivalent implementations to differ in verifiability. 

2.1 Deductive Verification in Why3 

Deductive verification provides mathematical guarantees about software correct-ness by proving that an implementation satisfies a formal specification. In Why3, programs are written in WhyML, which supports both functional and imperative programming. Why3 generates verification conditions from annotated programs and delegates them to external SMT solvers and automated theorem provers. Correctness is expressed using contracts. A function’s expected input state is specified with requires clauses, or preconditions, while its guaranteed output state is specified with ensures clauses, or postconditions. Iterative and recur-sive constructs usually require additional proof guidance. Loops use invariant 

clauses to state properties that hold before the loop and are preserved by every iteration. They also use variant clauses to provide a strictly decreasing mea-sure, such as an integer bound or data-structure size, that proves termination. Recursive functions similarly require contracts and termination arguments. Why3 also supports ghost code: proof-only variables, expressions, and state-ments that help verification without changing executable behavior. Ghost code is useful for recording logical facts that are implicit in the implementation, such as which part of the input has been processed, how an accumulator relates to the specification, or which witness supports a postcondition. 

2.2 Representation and Control Structure 

The choice of data representation affects the shape of the proof. Array programs typically require index-based reasoning. Every array access creates bounds obli-gations, and functional properties often require quantified facts over ranges of indices. Imperative array algorithms therefore need loop invariants that summa-rize what is known about processed prefixes, suffixes, or windows. List programs shift the burden from index arithmetic to structural reasoning. They avoid many bounds checks, but specifications often require recursive pred-icates for properties such as membership, length, occurrences, or substructure. 4 Yu and Martins              

> Table 1. Typical proof obligations induced by implementation structure.
> Program choice Typical proof burden and guidance Array + imperative Bounds checks, index arithmetic, and quantified range facts; usually requires loop invariants over processed pre-fixes, suffixes, or windows, sometimes with ghost code to record processed-state summaries.
> Array + recursive Bounds and index obligations remain, but recursive helper contracts can expose smaller subproblems and align proof obligations with recursive calls.
> List + recursive Structural reasoning over Nil /Cons , length, member-ship, occurrences, and substructure; usually requires re-cursive predicates and helper lemmas.
> List + imperative Mutable traversal plus structural list reasoning; usually requires invariants and ghost code relating visited ele-ments, remaining elements, and logical summaries used in the specification.

Proofs may then require helper contracts or lemmas that connect these recursive definitions to the implementation. Control structure also matters. Recursive implementations often align with recursive specifications, allowing proof obligations to follow recursive calls. Im-perative implementations must instead summarize mutable state with loop in-variants: an accumulator, index, or reference cell may have an obvious algorith-mic role, but that role must be made explicit for the verifier. Table 1 summarizes the typical proof obligations induced by the four imple-mentation families studied in this paper. These differences motivate implemen-tation diversity. Two implementations may be intended to satisfy the same task-level semantics while producing substantially different verification conditions. A failed verification attempt may therefore reflect an incorrect implementation, but it may also reflect a weak invariant, a missing termination argument, or a helper fact that has not been exposed to the solver. Diversify2Verify tests this hypothesis by generating array-recursive, array-imperative, list-recursive, and list-imperative variants for each benchmark task. 

# 3 Diversify2Verify by Example 

Figure 1 shows the Diversify2Verify pipeline. Given a task description, target signature, concrete tests, and target representation, Diversify2Verify separates generation into three stages: Stage 1 infers a semantic contract, Stage 2 gener-ates executable implementations, and Stage 3 adds proof annotations to produce a verification artifact. This separation makes explicit the roles of the three arti-facts. The contract states what makes a result correct, the implementation com-putes a candidate result, and the final artifact must provide the proof bridges that connect local program state to the contract. Diversifying to Verify: When Task-Equivalent Programs Differ in Verifiability 5Task + Test Cases Stage 1 (§4.1) Contract Generation Run Why3 on Spec. + Test Lemmas Stage 2 (§4.2) Implementation Generation Run Why3 Test Cases Stage 3 (§4.3) Full Verification Run Why3 Full Verifier   

> ✓Verified Why3 Artifact
> ×Unverified Why3 Artifact repair budget exhausted repair spec. or test lemmas repair or regenerate code repair invariants, assertions, or lemmas

Fig. 1. Overview of the Diversify2Verify staged verification pipeline. Why3 is used after Stage 1 to check the generated specification and test lemmas, during Stage 2 to exe-cute test cases against candidate implementations, and after Stage 3 to discharge the verification conditions for the final annotated artifact. 

Running example. We use Maximum Distance Between a Pair of Values as a running example. The function takes two non-increasing, zero-indexed integer arrays, nums1 and nums2 . A pair of indices (i, j ) is valid when both indices are in bounds, i ≤ j, and nums1[i] <= nums2[j] . The distance of a valid pair is 

j − i. The task is to return the maximum valid distance, or 0 when no valid pair has positive distance. For example, given 

nums1 = [30,29,19,5] nums2 = [25,25,25,25,25] ,

the index pair (i, j ) = (2 , 4) is valid because nums1[2] = 19 , nums2[4] = 25 ,

2 ≤ 4, and 19 ≤ 25 . Its distance is j − i = 4 − 2 = 2 . No valid pair has larger distance, so the expected output is 2.

Contract generation. Stage 1 defines correctness without describing how to com-pute the result. For the array version of the running example, the generated contract captures well-formed inputs, non-increasing arrays, valid index pairs, pair distances, and maximality. The key predicate is maximum_distance_spec . It separates the zero case from the positive case: a positive result must be realized by some valid pair and must upper-bound the distance of every valid pair. Thus, the contract specifies the semantic property of the result, not the algorithm used to compute it. The full Stage 1 artifact also includes helper definitions and test lemmas derived from the concrete examples. These test lemmas ensure the contract aligns with the concrete examples, though passing them does not guarantee the natural-language task is perfectly captured. 6 Yu and Martins 

  

> 1

predicate valid_pair  

> 2

(nums1: array int) (nums2: array int) (i: int) (j: int) =  

> 3

0 ≤ i < length nums1 ∧ 0 ≤ j < length nums2 ∧ 

> 4

i ≤ j ∧ nums1[i] ≤ nums2[j]  

> 56

predicate has_pair_distance  

> 7

(nums1: array int) (nums2: array int) (d: int) =  

> 8

exists i j: int.  

> 9

valid_pair nums1 nums2 i j ∧ d = pair_distance i j  

> 10 11

predicate distance_upper_bound  

> 12

(nums1: array int) (nums2: array int) (d: int) =  

> 13

forall i j: int. valid_pair nums1 nums2 i j → pair_distance i j ≤ d 

> 14 15

predicate maximum_distance_spec  

> 16

(nums1: array int) (nums2: array int) (res: int) =  

> 17

(res = 0 ∧ no_positive_distance_pair nums1 nums2) ∨ 

> 18

(0 < res ∧ has_pair_distance nums1 nums2 res ∧ 

> 19

distance_upper_bound nums1 nums2 res)  

> 20 21

val maximum_distance_between_a_pair_of_values_array  

> 22

(nums1: array int) (nums2: array int) : int  

> 23

requires { valid_input nums1 nums2 }  

> 24

ensures { maximum_distance_spec nums1 nums2 result } 

 

Implementation generation. Stage 2 generates executable WhyML candidates for the same semantic task. For the running example, the array-imperative variant uses the standard two-pointer scan, maintaining indices i and j and a reference 

best for the largest distance found so far. When nums1[i] <= nums2[j] , the implementation updates best and advances j; otherwise, it advances i.

Full verification. Stage 3 combines an accepted contract with a tested imple-mentation and adds the annotations needed for Why3 verification. For the array-imperative variant, the main challenge is to prove that the local two-pointer scan establishes the global maximality condition required by maximum_distance_spec .

  

> 1

while !i < length nums1 && !j < length nums2 do  

> 2

invariant { 0 ≤ !i ≤ length nums1 }  

> 3

invariant { 0 ≤ !j ≤ length nums2 }  

> 4

invariant { 0 ≤ !best }  

> 5

invariant { !best = 0 ∨ has_pair_distance nums1 nums2 !best }  

> 6

invariant { processed_j_upper_bound nums1 nums2 !j !best }  

> 7

invariant { left_future_excluded nums1 nums2 !i !j }  

> 8

variant { (length nums1 - !i) + (length nums2 - !j) }  

> 9

(* loop body *)  

> 10

done 

 

The initial invariants establish basic safety facts about the loop indices and the current value of best . The witness invariant connects best to the contract by Diversifying to Verify: When Task-Equivalent Programs Differ in Verifiability 7         

> Table 2. Repair boundaries in Diversify2Verify.
> Stage Policy Stage 1: Contract
> Repair syntax/type errors, helper definitions, example lem-mas, and semantic mistakes before freezing; the accepted representation-specific contract is then fixed.
> Stage 2: Implementation
> Repair or regenerate executable code only within the same representation and control-structure family.
> Stage 3: Verification
> Add proof scaffolding such as invariants, assertions, ghost code, internal helper contracts, and lemmas; preserve the contract, implementation family, and executable behavior.

requiring that any positive value of best is realized by some valid pair. The final two invariants provide the main proof bridge. processed_j_upper_bound states that all valid pairs with already processed right indices have distance at most 

best , while left_future_excluded justifies discarding left indices that cannot produce better future pairs. Together, these annotations connect the local state of the two-pointer scan to the global maximality condition in the postcondition. For this task, the array-imperative and array-recursive variants verify without repair, whereas the list-recursive and list-imperative variants require two repair attempts. Since the task is naturally array-oriented, this example should not be read as evidence that arrays are generally easier to verify. It instead illustrates the broader point studied in our evaluation: representation and control-structure choices can substantially change verification effort. 

# 4 Generation and Repair Policies 

Section 3 described the pipeline through one task. We now summarize the policies used across all benchmarks. These policies define what each stage may generate, what each stage may repair, and which semantic boundaries must be preserved. Table 2 summarizes the policy enforced at each stage. The central rule is a frozen-contract discipline: once a Stage 1 contract is accepted for a representa-tion, later stages may repair implementations and proof annotations, but they may not change the public semantic target for that representation. 

4.1 Contract generation policy 

Stage 1 takes a natural-language problem statement, a target signature, con-crete examples, and a target representation. It produces a representation-specific Why3 contract containing the target declaration, preconditions, postconditions, and any helper predicates or logical functions needed to express the task. The natural-language description is treated as the primary source of semantic intent. Examples are used as concrete checks and as limited evidence for resolv-ing ambiguity, but not as a complete behavioral specification. Stage 1 therefore separates assumptions about valid inputs from requirements on the output. In-put assumptions become requires clauses or explicit validity predicates, while output requirements become ensures clauses. 8 Yu and Martins 

The contract is written in the reasoning style of the target representation. Array contracts use lengths, explicit bounds, and bounded quantification over indices. List contracts use structural definitions over Nil and Cons , or standard list-library notions when they match the task. The goal is not to mechanically translate between arrays and lists, but to produce representation-appropriate contracts that capture the same underlying task. Thus, we use task-equivalent to mean that the array and list variants target the same benchmark-level semantics through representation-specific contracts; we do not additionally prove that the two formal contracts are logically equivalent. Stage 1 favors direct mathematical characterizations over executable-looking specifications. For optimization tasks, the postcondition usually separates feasi-bility from optimality: the result must be achieved by a valid witness, and no valid witness may have a better value. For Boolean, counting, and transformation tasks, the postcondition states the exact semantic relation between the inputs and the returned value. After generation, the Stage 1 artifact is first parsed and type-checked by Why3. We then run a separate Stage 1 validation pass that attempts to prove the example-derived test lemmas. These lemmas instantiate the generated contract on concrete benchmark examples and serve as a lightweight consistency check between the contract and the examples. They do not prove that the contract fully captures the natural-language task. We therefore use accepted contract to mean a representation-specific contract that is well formed in Why3 and whose example-derived test lemmas are discharged by the Stage 1 validation procedure, possibly after one repair attempt. Acceptance is not a proof of full semantic correctness with respect to the natural-language task. Repair is guided by the kind of Stage 1 failure. Syntax and type errors are fixed directly. If the artifact type-checks but the separate Stage 1 validation pass fails to prove the example-derived lemmas, its diagnostics are passed to at most one Stage 1 repair call. This repair may add assertions, unfold helper definitions, or simplify logically equivalent helper predicates. Semantic repair is allowed only before freezing, and only when the contract is inconsistent with the task statement or examples. Once the artifact is well formed and its example-derived lemmas are proved, the accepted contract is frozen for later stages. 

4.2 Implementation diversity policy 

Stage 2 generates executable WhyML candidates. For each benchmark task, 

Diversify2Verify generates four implementation families: array-recursive, array-imperative, list-recursive, and list-imperative. Recursive variants use structural recursion or recursive helpers. Imperative variants use loops, mutable references, and explicit state updates. Within a fixed family, the implementation may choose the algorithmic strat-egy, traversal order, helper decomposition, and accumulator structure. Dur-ing repair, however, it must preserve the accepted Stage 1 contract, the re-quested representation, and the requested control-structure family. Thus, an array-imperative candidate may be repaired into a different array-imperative Diversifying to Verify: When Task-Equivalent Programs Differ in Verifiability 9

algorithm, but it may not become list-based or recursive, and it may not modify the contract it is checked against. Diversity is introduced to preserve the proof-obligation differences summa-rized in Table 1. By generating one recursive and one imperative implementation for each representation, the evaluation can measure how data representation and control structure affect verifiability while keeping the accepted Stage 1 contract fixed within each representation. Each candidate is checked by type checking and by executable tests derived from the benchmark examples. Failed candidates are repaired or regenerated within a bounded budget of five attempts while preserving their representation and implementation style. Passing these tests does not establish correctness; it only determines which candidates are submitted to Stage 3. 

4.3 Final verification repair policy 

Stage 3 turns one tested implementation into a deductive verification artifact. It combines the Stage 1 contract with the Stage 2 implementation and removes the executable tests, which are no longer part of the final proof artifact. It then adds proof scaffolding such as internal helper contracts, loop invariants, variants, assertions, ghost code, and auxiliary lemmas. These annotations may strengthen the proof context, but they may not weaken or replace the Stage 1 contract. The main proof obligation is to bridge local program state to the semantic contract generated in Stage 1. Local state includes loop indices, recursive argu-ments, accumulators, partial results, and mutable references. Stage 3 annotations are therefore proof guidance: they expose the relationship between these local quantities and the specification without changing the meaning of the program. The generated verification conditions cover safety, termination, and func-tional correctness. Safety obligations prove that operations such as array accesses and pattern matches are well defined. Termination obligations are discharged using loop or recursion variants. Functional-correctness obligations require the proof scaffolding to imply the Stage 1 postconditions at loop exits, recursive base cases, and helper returns. If verification fails, Stage 3 repair is restricted to proof-oriented changes us-ing two repair attempts. Typical repairs strengthen loop invariants, add missing variants, insert local assertions, introduce ghost code, or prove helper lemmas that expose facts needed by the SMT solvers. Local implementation edits are per-mitted only when they are semantics-preserving refactorings or proof-enabling local changes that preserve the implementation family and executable behavior on valid inputs. Stage 3 may not weaken the Stage 1 contract, add stronger preconditions to the target entry point, change the target signature, switch be-tween array and list representations, or replace a recursive implementation with an imperative one or vice versa to make verification easier. These restrictions are imposed by the Stage 3 prompts and repair driver, but the LLM is not a trusted enforcement mechanism. We therefore treat preserva-tion of the frozen Stage 1 contract as a property to be checked after generation, rather than as something guaranteed by the prompt alone. A successful Stage 3 10 Yu and Martins       

> Table 3. Summary of the verification benchmark. Property Value Unique tasks 73 Available tests per task min 25, median 109, mean 106.7, max 178 Input arity 30 one-arg, 34 two-arg, 7 three-arg, 2 four-arg Return shape 58 integer, 15 array or list

run produces a fully verified Why3 artifact. A failed run produces the best un-verified artifact together with verifier diagnostics and repair traces. 

# 5 Benchmark Construction 

We construct the benchmark from LeetCodeDataset [27], which provides Leet-Code-style Python programming problems with natural-language descriptions and executable test cases. Because LeetCode problems are public, we do not claim that this benchmark is contamination-free or that it measures a model’s ability to solve unseen programming tasks. The descriptions, standard algo-rithms, or Python solutions may have appeared in model training data. We instead use LeetCodeDataset as a source of task descriptions and tests for con-structing a controlled verification benchmark. The evaluated artifacts—Why3 contracts, WhyML implementations, proof annotations, repair traces, and ver-ifier outcomes—are generated by our pipeline and are not part of the original dataset. While potential contamination might help the model recognize the un-derlying algorithmic task, our main measurement is comparative: whether dif-ferent representation and control-structure choices lead to different verification outcomes under the same verifier and repair budget. Starting from roughly 2,900 tasks, we first filtered for problems over primitive values and integer sequences, such as arrays and lists, excluding strings, trees, floating-point values, and other structures that would require additional Why3 modeling. This type-based pruning produced approximately 1,000 candidates. We then used an LLM-assisted triage pass to retain tasks whose behavior ap-peared expressible with arithmetic and integer-sequence properties and that ad-mitted multiple plausible implementation strategies, reducing the set to around 150 benchmarks. Finally, we applied the Stage 1 contract-generation and valida-tion procedure from Section 4.1. We retained only benchmarks for which Stage 1 produces accepted contracts for the target representations used in the evalua-tion. As in Section 4.1, acceptance means that the contract is well formed in Why3 and that the example-derived validation lemmas are discharged, possibly after repair. This filter yielded 73 benchmark tasks and is part of the benchmark construction process rather than an independent Stage 1 success result. Table 3 summarizes the final benchmark. The retained set contains 73 tasks with varying input arities, return shapes, and test-suite sizes. For each task, Di-versify2Verify generates four implementation variants, yielding 292 artifacts. The benchmark should therefore be read as a controlled verification benchmark, not Diversifying to Verify: When Task-Equivalent Programs Differ in Verifiability 11 

as a representative sample of arbitrary LeetCode tasks: it is intentionally biased toward SMT-friendly data types, tractable specifications, and tasks with ac-cepted Stage 1 contracts. This selection lets us isolate the paper’s main question: how representation and control-structure choices affect deductive verifiability. 

# 6 Implementation 

Diversify2Verify is implemented as a scripted, non-interactive pipeline around Codex. We use Codex as the programming agent: it receives a stage prompt, applies the local stage instructions, creates or edits WhyML files, and returns a candidate artifact. The underlying model configuration is selected per stage. Stages 1 and 3 use GPT-5.5 with high reasoning, because these stages involve formal specification and proof construction. Stage 2 uses GPT-5.4 with medium reasoning, because this stage primarily generates executable implementations that are later checked against the accepted contract. Each stage is invoked by a driver script. The driver builds a prompt from the benchmark description, target signature, examples, target representation, and, when applicable, the implementation family. It then invokes Codex, extracts the WhyML artifact, runs the checks, and either accepts the artifact or launches a bounded repair attempt. The drivers are non-interactive: all inputs, model con-figurations, checker commands, and repair budgets are fixed before evaluation. The Codex context includes a local skill for each stage. A skill is a stage-specific instruction file that describes the expected WhyML artifact shape, per-mitted Why3 libraries, representation-specific idioms, checker commands, and common failure patterns. The Stage 1 skills focus on contract structure, helper predicates, and example-derived test lemmas. The Stage 2 skills focus on exe-cutable recursive or imperative WhyML code for the selected representation. The Stage 3 skills focus on proof-oriented annotations, including invariants, variants, assertions, ghost state, internal helper contracts, and auxiliary lemmas. During generation, each driver performs only the checks needed to reject malformed artifacts early. Stage 1 contracts and Stage 3 verification artifacts must parse and type-check in Why3. Stage 2 implementations must additionally pass the selected executable tests. These fast checks prevent invalid artifacts from flowing to later stages, but they do not require all proof obligations to be discharged. For each representation-specific Stage 1 contract, the validation pass at-tempts to prove seven example-derived lemmas. For Stage 2, each candidate implementation is checked on 20 executable tests selected from the benchmark test suite. These tests are used only as filtering checks before Stage 3; they are not part of the final deductive verification artifact. Full verification is run by a separate Why3 verifier driver rather than by Codex itself. In our experiments, we used Why3 1.8.2 together with the SMT solvers Z3 4.8.6, Alt-Ergo 2.4.0, and CVC4 1.8, using a 10-second timeout per solver call. The verifier first attempts direct proving with this solver portfolio. For goals that remain, it applies increasingly aggressive Why3 transformations, 12 Yu and Martins        

> Table 4. Generation configuration used by Diversify2Verify .
> Stage Task and feedback Model Budget Stage 1: Contract
> Generate a representation-specific contract; type-check it and validate example lemmas. GPT-5.5 (high) 1 repair
> Stage 2: Implementation
> Generate executable WhyML; check with type checking and executable tests. GPT-5.4 (medium) 5 attempts
> Stage 3: Verification
> Add proof annotations; repair using Why3 verification diagnostics. GPT-5.5 (high) 2 repairs

first splitting large verification conditions and then inlining helper definitions when needed. An artifact is counted as verified only if all generated verification conditions are discharged by this verifier configuration. When Stage 3 verification fails, the verifier diagnostics are passed back to Codex only as feedback for the bounded repair calls summarized in Table 4. When verification or filtering fails, Diversify2Verify relies on bounded, log-guided Codex calls for repair (summarized in Table 4). Each repair prompt includes the failed artifact, the relevant checker or verifier diagnostics, and the stage inputs needed to preserve context. For Stage 3, this includes the fail-ing Why3 file, the verifier log, the benchmark description, the frozen Stage 1 specification, and the tested Stage 2 implementation. The first repair attempt addresses the initial failure. Later attempts use the updated diagnostics to focus on the remaining unproved goals. Each repaired artifact is then rechecked by the corresponding driver. 

# 7 Evaluation 

Our evaluation focuses on Stage 3, where Diversify2Verify attempts to turn exe-cutable WhyML implementations into deductively verified artifacts. Stage 1 and Stage 2 serve as prerequisite filters for this experiment. Stage 1 admits tasks for which both array and list contracts are accepted, and Stage 2 admits only imple-mentations that pass type checking and executable tests. The main evaluation therefore begins after these filters: given an accepted contract and a diverse set of tested implementations, can Stage 3 produce fully verified artifacts, and which representation or implementation style is easiest to verify ?

Pipeline setup results. The benchmark contains 73 tasks after the Stage 1 ac-ceptance filter described in Section 5. Because each retained task has accepted array and list contracts by construction, the evaluation uses 146 representation-specific Stage 1 contracts. Of these accepted contracts, 85 required no repair and 61 required one contract-repair attempt. The array contracts account for 45 initially accepted contracts and 28 accepted after repair, while the list contracts account for 40 initially accepted contracts and 33 accepted after repair. Diversifying to Verify: When Task-Equivalent Programs Differ in Verifiability 13               

> Table 5. Overall Stage 3 verification results. Repair increases the number of verified artifacts from 96 initially to 154 after two repair passes. Attempt Newly verified Cumulative verified Remaining Cumulative rate Initial Stage 3 96 96 196 32.9% After repair 1 35 131 161 44.9% After repair 2 23 154 138 52.7%

Stage 2 targets four variants per task: array-recursive, array-imperative, list-recursive, and list-imperative. Within the five-attempt Stage 2 budget, Diver-sify2Verify obtains one type-checked, test-passing implementation for each vari-ant, yielding 292 candidates for Stage 3. The main evaluation therefore centers on the 292 final verification artifacts produced by combining these tested imple-mentations with the accepted Stage 1 contracts. 

Research Questions. We evaluate three research questions: 

RQ1: Verification effectiveness. How often does Stage 3 verify the imple-mentations, and how much do repair passes improve the verification rate? 

RQ2: Representation and implementation diversity. How does verifica-tion success vary across array and list representations and across recursive and imperative implementations? Does generating multiple variants increase the chance of obtaining at least one verified artifact for a task? 

RQ3: Remaining proof failures. For artifacts that remain unverified after repair, what kinds of proof obligations are left? 

7.1 RQ1: Verification effectiveness 

Table 5 summarizes the overall Stage 3 results. Of the 292 verification artifacts, 96 verify as generated. The first Codex-assisted repair pass verifies 35 additional artifacts, and the second repair pass verifies 23 more. Overall, Diversify2Verify 

verifies 154 artifacts after repair, corresponding to a final artifact-level verifica-tion rate of 52.7%. Repair is therefore responsible for a substantial fraction of the final successes. Among the 154 verified artifacts, 58 require at least one repair pass. The first repair pass gives the larger improvement, but the second pass still verifies 23 artifacts that remain unproved after the first repair. Most artifacts are proved without requiring the most aggressive Why3 trans-formations. Among the 154 verified artifacts, 133 are proved directly, 13 require splitting verification conditions, and 8 require both splitting and inlining helper definitions. This suggests that once the right contracts, invariants, and assertions are present, most verified artifacts are within reach of the base SMT portfolio. 

7.2 RQ2: Representation and implementation diversity 

At the task level, diversity increases the chance of obtaining a verified solution. For each task, we generate four variants, corresponding to the cross-product of 14 Yu and Martins                                                

> Table 6. Task-level verification outcomes over the 73 benchmark tasks. A task is counted as solved if at least one of its four variants verifies after repair. Task-level outcome Tasks % of tasks No variant verified 24 32.9% Exactly one variant verified 56.8% Exactly two variants verified 79.6% Exactly three variants verified 13 17.8% All four variants verified 24 32.9% At least one variant verified 49 67.1%
> Table 7. Stage 3 verification results by representation and implementation style. Re-cursive variants verify more often than imperative variants, while array and list repre-sentations have similar final verification rates. Variant Total Initial Repair 1 Repair 2 Verified Unverified Rate Array recursive 73 28 11 544 29 60.3% Array imperative 73 21 7735 38 47.9% List recursive 73 30 7340 33 54.8% List imperative 73 17 10 835 38 47.9% Total 292 96 35 23 154 138 52.7%

representation and implementation style: array-recursive, array-imperative, list-recursive, and list-imperative. Table 6 groups the 73 tasks by how many of these variants verify after repair. At least one variant verifies for 49 tasks, giving a task-level success rate of 67.1%. Among these 49 solved tasks, 25 are solved by only a subset of the variants, showing that different implementations make different tasks amenable to verification. Shifting from task-level success to individual artifact performance, Table 7 breaks down verification by representation and implementation style. Overall, recursive implementations verify more often than imperative implementations. Across both representations, 84 of 146 recursive artifacts verify, compared with 70 of 146 imperative artifacts. Array and list representations are closer overall: 79 of 146 array artifacts verify, compared with 75 of 146 list artifacts. The strongest individual variant family is array-recursive with 44 verified artifacts, followed closely by list-recursive with 40. Both imperative families trail behind, verifying 35 artifacts each. This difference is not surprising in a deductive-verification setting. Many Stage 1 specifications are expressed using recursive logical functions or induc-tive predicates. Recursive implementations often follow the same structure, so the proof can proceed by exposing the contract of each recursive call. In con-trast, imperative implementations require loop invariants that summarize the entire processed portion of the input and relate mutable program state to the logical specification. These invariants are often the hardest part of the proof to synthesize automatically. Diversifying to Verify: When Task-Equivalent Programs Differ in Verifiability 15 

The repair results suggest that imperative implementations are not worse executable candidates; they are harder to verify automatically. Before repair, re-cursive variants verify substantially more often than imperative variants. Repair narrows this gap by verifying 26 additional recursive artifacts and 32 additional imperative artifacts. This suggests that many imperative failures are due to missing proof structure, such as loop invariants, variants, and bridge assertions, rather than an incorrect implementation strategy. Thus, diversity helps not because one representation dominates, but because different variants expose different proof opportunities. Recursive implementa-tions often align better with recursive specifications, while imperative ones can become competitive once repair adds the missing loop-level proof structure. 

7.3 RQ3: Remaining proof failures 

After two repair passes, 138 artifacts remain unverified, even though all cor-responding Stage 2 implementations passed type checking and executable tests. These failures are therefore not failures to obtain type-checked, test-passing can-didates; they arise at the deductive verification stage. Many of these failures are close to verification. Among the 138 unverified artifacts, 62 have only one remaining unproved root goal, and 110 have at most three. The average number of remaining root goals is 2.5. This suggests that many failures are localized proof gaps rather than evidence of fundamentally incorrect implementations. The array-imperative artifact for the Longest Turbulent Subarray benchmark illustrates this pattern. The task is to return the length of the longest contiguous segment whose adjacent comparisons strictly alternate; equal adjacent elements break the segment. The implementation performs the standard linear scan, track-ing the current turbulent suffix and the best length seen so far. Its last remaining obligation arises when the current comparison alternates with the previous one, so the suffix is extended. The missing bridge is that any turbulent interval ending at i+1 can be shortened to one ending at i; the previous maximality invariant then bounds its length by old_current + 1 . We confirmed this diagnosis in a manual follow-up: adding proof-only helper lemmas for suffix-shortening and for lifting the previous bound to all intervals ending at i+1 discharged the remaining goal, without changing the executable code or weakening the specification. This repair was not included in the reported results, but it shows that at least some failures are due to missing proof structure rather than incorrect artifacts. This example illustrates a common remaining failure mode: the generated proof scaffolding does not expose the semantic bridge needed by the SMT solvers. Across the remaining failures, we see similar gaps involving insufficient loop invariants, missing helper contracts, array bounds or index arithmetic, structural list reasoning, and reasoning about counting, cardinality, or optimality. Overall, the remaining failures suggest two directions for improvement. Re-pair prompts could target bridge obligations more directly, such as connecting helper postconditions, loop invariants, or accumulator meanings to the specifi-16 Yu and Martins 

cation. The pipeline could also include specialized proof patterns for recurring domains such as index-range reasoning, counting, and optimization. 

7.4 Discussion and limitations 

The Stage 3 results show that both repair and implementation diversity matter. Repair increases artifact-level verification from 96 of 292 artifacts, or 32.9%, to 154 of 292 artifacts, or 52.7%. At the task level, using all four variants yields at least one verified artifact for 49 of 73 tasks, or 67.1%, compared with 44 tasks for the strongest individual family. Importantly, these results are relative to the accepted Stage 1 contracts. De-ductive verification proves that a Stage 3 implementation satisfies its contract, not that the contract fully captures the natural-language benchmark description. To assess this specification risk, we ran a screening audit using GPT-5.5 (con-figured for high reasoning) on the 292 final artifacts. The judge evaluated two criteria: whether the Stage 1 specification matched the benchmark description, and whether Stage 3 preserved that specification. 

Specification Match The judge flagged 10 potential mismatches. Because the 146 Stage 1 contracts are reused across variants, we manually inspected these flagged cases to find the root cause. Only one case corresponded to a specification that was genuinely too weak and could potentially accept incorrect programs. Seven cases involved missing input-bound constraints typical of LeetCode problems; however, these omissions did not affect the intended behavior on valid inputs. The remaining two cases involved inconsistencies between generated tests and stated input constraints; these tests were preemptively excluded before Stage 2 testing. 

Specification Preservation The judge flagged only one artifact for failing to pre-serve the contract. Here, Stage 3 added preconditions that were implied by the benchmark description but absent from the frozen Stage 1 contract—a clear vi-olation of our strict Stage 3 policy. Overall, this 291-of-292 success rate demon-strates that the pipeline reliably preserves the boundary between specification generation and proof repair. 

Limitations Several threats to validity remain. First, the LLM judge is an au-dit mechanism, not a formal guarantee; subtle specification errors may persist. Second, all generation, repair, and evaluation steps use GPT-family models; other LLMs may yield different verification and repair behaviors. Third, passing Stage 2’s finite executable tests does not establish functional correctness, which is only attempted in Stage 3. Fourth, because the benchmark is filtered through Stage 1, our results specifically measure verification on tasks where both array and list contracts were successfully accepted. Finally, our focus on integer and sequence tasks means these conclusions may not directly transfer to programs requiring richer heap structures, floating-point arithmetic, concurrency, or ex-ternal libraries. Furthermore, some remaining failures likely reflect limitations of the SMT portfolio rather than fundamentally unprovable implementations. Diversifying to Verify: When Task-Equivalent Programs Differ in Verifiability 17 

# 8 Related Work 

LLM-based code generation. Large language models have been widely studied for generating executable programs from natural-language prompts. Benchmarks and systems such as Codex and HumanEval [4], MBPP [1], and AlphaCode [13] established test-based functional correctness as the dominant evaluation crite-rion for LLM code generation. In this setting, diversity is usually a sampling mechanism: generating many candidates increases the chance that one passes the available tests. Diversify2Verify uses tests only as an intermediate filter. The final artifact must also include a formal contract and enough proof guidance for Why3 to prove that the implementation satisfies that contract. Thus, our use of diversity is different from pass@k-style sampling: we study whether alternative representations and control structures lead to verification conditions that are easier or harder for SMT-backed deductive verification. 

Deductive verification and formal proof systems. Diversify2Verify is built on Why3 [7] and is related to other deductive verification systems such as Dafny [12], Viper [19], and Verus [11], as well as proof assistants such as Lean [17] and Rocq [20]. These systems provide languages for programs, specifications, and proofs, but also expose the central challenge addressed in this paper: verified programming requires not only code, but also contracts, invariants, lemmas, ghost state, and other proof structure. We use Why3 because WhyML sup-ports both functional and imperative programming while making the separation between executable code, specifications, and proof artifacts explicit. Although other deductive verifiers could serve this role, Why3 allows us to compare re-cursive and imperative implementations over arrays and lists within a single, unified framework. Our goal is not to introduce a new verifier, but to study how LLM-generated program variants interact with an existing deductive verifier. 

LLMs for formal reasoning and verified program synthesis. Recent work has used LLMs for autoformalization, theorem proving, and verifier-guided program generation. Autoformalization translates informal mathematical statements into formal languages [26,9], while systems such as LeanDojo [29] and Baldur [8] use LLMs together with proof-assistant feedback, retrieval, or automated provers to construct formal proofs. Other systems integrate LLMs directly with program verifiers. A large body of work focuses on Dafny, including systems that gener-ate assertions (Laurel [18], Daisy [23]), evaluate annotation generation (Dafny-Bench [14]), study AI-assisted method synthesis (Misu et al. [16]), and check con-sistency between code and docstrings (Clover [24]). Similar efforts target Rust via Verus (AutoVerus [28]) or integrate LLMs broadly with automated reason-ers (Lemur [25]). Diversify2Verify is complementary to these systems. Rather than asking only whether an LLM can produce one verified program or missing an-notations for a fixed program, we ask whether the form of the implementation affects verifiability. 18 Yu and Martins 

Specification generation, proof guidance, and repair. Our first stage builds on prior work translating informal intent into formal postconditions [5] and LLM-based specification generation with verification-guided selection [15]. These sys-tems highlight a central risk in LLM-assisted verification: a specification can be verifiable while failing to capture the intended behavior. Diversify2Verify miti-gates this risk by using examples to check the specification against the natural-language task and by using an LLM judge, followed by manual inspection, to analyze cases where the specification may not match the intended semantics. Our final stage is related to invariant generation and proof guidance. Clas-sical tools such as Daikon [6] dynamically infer likely invariants, while recent work studies LLM generation and ranking of loop invariants [3,10,21] and neu-ral synthesis for SMT-assisted proof-oriented programming [2]. Diversify2Verify 

also performs bounded repair, but with stage-specific boundaries: Stage 1 may repair the specification before freezing, Stage 2 may regenerate code only within the chosen representation and family, and Stage 3 may refine proof scaffolding while preserving the contract and implementation family. These boundaries pre-vent verification from succeeding by weakening the specification or replacing a difficult implementation with an easier one. 

# 9 Conclusion 

Generating verified programs from natural language requires more than infer-ring a correct specification: it also requires an implementation whose structure is amenable to deductive verification. This paper introduced Diversify2Verify , a staged LLM-based approach that exploits this observation by generating multi-ple task-equivalent implementations across representation and control-structure families and checking them against fixed representation-specific contracts. The main result is that implementation diversity improves task coverage. Across 73 benchmark tasks and 292 generated artifacts, Diversify2Verify verifies 96 artifacts initially(32.9%), and 154 after two repair passes(52.7%). At the task level, at least one variant verifies for 49 tasks, yielding a 67.1% success rate. Recursive variants verify more often than imperative variants, while array and list representations have similar aggregate rates. These results demonstrate that task-equivalent implementations can differ substantially in verifiability, and that generating diverse variants increases the chance of finding one a verifier can prove correct. Future work should extend this diversity-oriented methodology to richer data structures, strings, floating-point arithmetic, and library-based programs. It should also explore stronger invariant generation, better failure classification, and formal equivalence between representation-specific contracts. Applying this approach to other systems, such as Verus, would help distinguish Why3-specific engineering effects from a broader principle: implementation diversity is a pow-erful, practical tool for LLM-assisted verified programming. Diversifying to Verify: When Task-Equivalent Programs Differ in Verifiability 19 

# Acknowledgments 

This work was partially supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under Award CCF2427581 and DARPA under Agreement FA8750-24-9-1000. 

# References 

1. Austin, J., Odena, A., Nye, M.I., Bosma, M., Michalewski, H., Dohan, D., Jiang, E., Cai, C.J., Terry, M., Le, Q.V., Sutton, C.: Program Synthesis with Large Language Models. CoRR abs/2108.07732 (2021) 2. Chakraborty, S., Ebner, G., Bhat, S., Fakhoury, S., Fatima, S., Lahiri, S.K., Swamy, N.: Towards Neural Synthesis for SMT-Assisted Proof-Oriented Programming. In: ICSE. pp. 1755–1767. IEEE (2025) 3. Chakraborty, S., Lahiri, S.K., Fakhoury, S., Musuvathi, M., Lal, A., Rastogi, A., Senthilnathan, A., Sharma, R., Swamy, N.: Ranking LLM-Generated Loop Invari-ants for Program Verification. CoRR abs/2310.09342 (2023) 4. Chen, M., Tworek, J., Jun, H., Yuan, Q., de Oliveira Pinto, H.P., Kaplan, J., Edwards, H., Burda, Y., Joseph, N., Brockman, G., Ray, A., Puri, R., Krueger, G., Petrov, M., Khlaaf, H., Sastry, G., Mishkin, P., Chan, B., Gray, S., Ryder, N., Pavlov, M., Power, A., Kaiser, L., Bavarian, M., Winter, C., Tillet, P., Such, F.P., Cummings, D., Plappert, M., Chantzis, F., Barnes, E., Herbert-Voss, A., Guss, W.H., Nichol, A., Paino, A., Tezak, N., Tang, J., Babuschkin, I., Balaji, S., Jain, S., Saunders, W., Hesse, C., Carr, A.N., Leike, J., Achiam, J., Misra, V., Morikawa, E., Radford, A., Knight, M., Brundage, M., Murati, M., Mayer, K., Welinder, P., McGrew, B., Amodei, D., McCandlish, S., Sutskever, I., Zaremba, W.: Evaluating large language models trained on code. CoRR abs/2107.03374 (2021) 5. Endres, M., Fakhoury, S., Chakraborty, S., Lahiri, S.K.: Can Large Language Mod-els Transform Natural Language Intent into Formal Method Postconditions? Proc. ACM Softw. Eng. 1(FSE), 1889–1912 (2024) 6. Ernst, M.D., Perkins, J.H., Guo, P.J., McCamant, S., Pacheco, C., Tschantz, M.S., Xiao, C.: The Daikon system for dynamic detection of likely invariants. Sci. Com-put. Program. 69 (1-3), 35–45 (2007) 7. Filliâtre, J.C., Paskevich, A.: Why3—where programs meet provers. In: ESOP. pp. 125–128. Springer (2013) 8. First, E., Rabe, M.N., Ringer, T., Brun, Y.: Baldur: Whole-proof generation and repair with large language models. In: FSE. pp. 1229–1241. ACM (2023) 9. Kabra, A., Laurent, J., Bharadwaj, S., Martins, R., Mitsch, S., Platzer, A.: Can Large Language Models Autoformalize Kinematics? In: FMCAD. TU Wien Aca-demic Press (2025) 10. Kamath, A., Senthilnathan, A., Chakraborty, S., Deligiannis, P., Lahiri, S.K., Lal, A., Rastogi, A., Roy, S., Sharma, R.: Finding inductive loop invariants using large language models. CoRR abs/2311.07948 (2023) 11. Lattuada, A., Hance, T., Cho, C., Brun, M., Subasinghe, I., Zhou, Y., Howell, J., Parno, B., Hawblitzel, C.: Verus: Verifying rust programs using linear ghost types. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 7(OOPSLA1), 286–315 (2023) 12. Leino, K.R.M.: Dafny: An Automatic Program Verifier for Functional Correctness. In: LPAR. pp. 348–370. LNCS, Springer (2010) 20 Yu and Martins 13. Li, Y., Choi, D.H., Chung, J., Kushman, N., Schrittwieser, J., Leblond, R., Ec-cles, T., Keeling, J., Gimeno, F., Lago, A.D., Hubert, T., Choy, P., de Mas-son d’Autume, C., Babuschkin, I., Chen, X., Huang, P., Welbl, J., Gowal, S., Cherepanov, A., Molloy, J., Mankowitz, D.J., Robson, E.S., Kohli, P., de Freitas, N., Kavukcuoglu, K., Vinyals, O.: Competition-Level Code Generation with Al-phaCode. CoRR abs/2203.07814 (2022) 14. Loughridge, C., Sun, Q., Ahrenbach, S., Cassano, F., Sun, C., Sheng, Y., Mudide, A., Misu, M.R.H., Amin, N., Tegmark, M.: DafnyBench: A Benchmark for Formal Software Verification. Trans. Mach. Learn. Res. 2025 (2025) 15. Ma, L., Liu, S., Li, Y., Xie, X., Bu, L.: Specgen: Automated generation of formal program specifications via large language models. In: ICSE. pp. 16–28. IEEE (2025) 16. Misu, M.R.H., Lopes, C.V., Ma, I., Noble, J.: Towards ai-assisted synthesis of verified dafny methods. Proc. ACM Softw. Eng. 1(FSE), 812–835 (2024) 17. de Moura, L., Ullrich, S.: The Lean 4 Theorem Prover and Programming Language. In: CADE. pp. 625–635. LNCS, Springer (2021) 18. Mugnier, E., Gonzalez, E.A., Polikarpova, N., Jhala, R., Zhou, Y.: Laurel: Unblock-ing Automated Verification with Large Language Models. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 9(OOPSLA1), 1519–1545 (2025) 19. Müller, P., Schwerhoff, M., Summers, A.J.: Viper: A Verification Infrastructure for Permission-Based Reasoning. In: Dependable Software Systems Engineering, pp. 104–125. IOS Press (2017) 20. Paulin-Mohring, C.: Introduction to the Coq Proof-Assistant for Practical Soft-ware Verification. In: Tools for Practical Software Verification, LASER. pp. 45–95. LNCS, Springer (2011) 21. Pirzada, M.A.A., Reger, G., Bhayat, A., Cordeiro, L.C.: LLM-Generated Invariants for Bounded Model Checking Without Loop Unrolling. In: ASE. pp. 1395–1407. ACM (2024) 22. Poesia, G., Loughridge, C., Amin, N.: dafny-annotator: Ai-assisted verification of dafny programs. CoRR abs/2411.15143 (2024) 23. Silva, Á.F., Mendes, A., Martins, R.: Inferring multiple helper dafny assertions with llms. CoRR abs/2511.00125 (2025) 24. Sun, C., Sheng, Y., Padon, O., Barrett, C.W.: Clover: Closed-Loop Verifiable Code Generation. In: AI Verification. pp. 134–155. LNCS, Springer (2024) 25. Wu, H., Barrett, C.W., Narodytska, N.: Lemur: Integrating large language models in automated program verification. In: ICLR. OpenReview.net (2024) 26. Wu, Y., Jiang, A.Q., Li, W., Rabe, M.N., Staats, C., Jamnik, M., Szegedy, C.: Autoformalization with Large Language Models. In: NeurIPS (2022) 27. Xia, Y., Shen, W., Wang, Y., Liu, J.K., Sun, H., Wu, S., Hu, J., Xu, X.: Leetcode-dataset: A temporal dataset for robust evaluation and efficient training of code llms. CoRR abs/2504.14655 (2025) 28. Yang, C., Li, X., Misu, M.R.H., Yao, J., Cui, W., Gong, Y., Hawblitzel, C., Lahiri, S.K., Lorch, J.R., Lu, S., Yang, F., Zhou, Z., Lu, S.: Autoverus: Automated proof generation for rust code. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 9(OOPSLA2), 3454–3482 (2025) 29. Yang, K., Swope, A.M., Gu, A., Chalamala, R., Song, P., Yu, S., Godil, S., Prenger, R.J., Anandkumar, A.: LeanDojo: Theorem Proving with Retrieval-Augmented Language Models. In: NeurIPS (2023)