Title: GGC: Selective Query Correction for Reliable Text-to-SPARQL Generation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.28082v1

Published Time: Fri, 31 Jul 2026 00:56:48 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# GGC: Selective Query Correction for Reliable Text-to-SPARQL Generation 

Yang Ziyi 1, Thanh-Son Nguyen 2, Nguyen Tuan Anh 1, Lihui Chen 1*1Nanyang Technological University, Centre for Info. Sciences and Systems 

> 2

Institute of High Performance Computing, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore 

Abstract 

Large language models (LLMs) have demon-strated strong capabilities in structured query generation, making them a natural choice for Text-to-SPARQL, which translates natural language questions into executable SPARQL queries over knowledge graphs. However, their initial outputs remain unreliable: generated queries may be executable yet semantically mis-aligned with input questions, leading to incor-rect retrieval. To address this issue, we propose Generator–Gate–Corrector (GGC), a frame-work for reliable LLM-based Text-to-SPARQL generation. GGC first uses a Generator to pro-duce an initial query, then applies a Gate to pre-dict whether correction is needed, and finally invokes a Corrector only for selected high-risk queries. This selective correction mechanism avoids unnecessary modifications and reduces the risk of degrading originally correct queries. Experiments on MCQA show that GGC im-proves query-level accuracy from 90.23% to 98.33% while reducing inference overhead by 45% compared with correcting all generated queries. Ablation studies show that the Gate is robust across thresholds and that Corrector training data composition affects correction ef-fectiveness and stability. Overall, the results demonstrate that selective correction enhances the accuracy, reliability, and efficiency of LLM-based text-to-SPARQL generation. 

1 Introduction 

Knowledge graph question answering (KGQA) aims to answer natural language questions (NLQs) by grounding them in the structured facts of knowl-edge graphs (KGs). Existing KGQA methods are typically categorized into semantic parsing (SP)-based methods and information retrieval (IR)-based methods (Lan et al., 2023). The former generates logical forms or query structures, while the latter obtains answers through entity, relation, or path retrieval over the graph.  

> *Corresponding author: elhchen@ntu.edu.sg .

In the context of RDF-based (Kellogg et al., 2026) KGs, Text-to-SPARQL is an important approach to KGQA. RDF-based KGs represent knowledge as subject-predicate-object triples, and SPARQL (Harris and Seaborne, 2013) is the stan-dard query language for RDF data. Therefore, Text-to-SPARQL aims to translate NLQs into ex-ecutable and semantically consistent SPARQL queries. Compared with direct natural language answer generation, this approach retrieves answers through explicit query execution over an external KG, making the intermediate query and retrieved graph facts inspectable and facilitating more verifi-able and interpretable results (Pan et al., 2024). In recent years, large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated strong capabilities in natural lan-guage understanding, generation, and code-related tasks (Brown et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021). These capabilities make them a natural choice for Text-to-SPARQL, where models must understand user questions and generate semantically consistent and executable structured queries. However, Text-to-SPARQL is not merely a text generation task. Generated queries must be exe-cutable while faithfully encoding the entities, rela-tions, constraints, variable bindings, and reasoning paths expressed in the NLQ (Banerjee et al., 2022). Since executability alone does not guarantee se-mantic correctness, LLM-based Text-to-SPARQL requires mechanisms to verify consistency with the original question, especially as LLMs may produce plausible but unfaithful outputs (Xu et al., 2023). Our experiments further show that this prob-lem is particularly prominent in Text-to-SPARQL. While the fine-tuned Generator achieves high query-level accuracy, many of its remaining errors are executable yet semantically flawed. We define Generator errors as initial SPARQL queries pro-duced by the Generator that are judged incorrect against the ground-truth queries. On the Movie Complex Question Answering (MCQA) (Hoang arXiv:2607.28082v1 [cs.CL] 30 Jul 2026 et al., 2024) dataset, semantic errors account for 77.70% of Generator errors, while syntactic errors account for only 21.07%. This indicates that rely-ing solely on execution failures to trigger correc-tions will miss many semantic errors. The key insight of this paper is that in LLM-based Text-to-SPARQL, the issue is not only how to generate queries, but also when to correct them. Correcting all generated results may fix incorrect queries, but it also incurs higher inference over-head and may degrade originally correct queries. In contrast, selective correction concentrates com-putation on high-risk samples, improving accuracy while reducing unnecessary rewriting. Experimen-tal results show that the proposed Generator–Gate– Corrector (GGC) framework improves query-level accuracy from 90.23% to 98.33%, with only about 10% additional inference time over Generator-only inference. Compared with correcting all samples, selective correction achieves higher accuracy while reducing inference time by about 45%. In summary, our contributions are as follows: • We analyze LLM-based Text-to-SPARQL from a reliability perspective and show that executable but semantically flawed queries are a significant source of errors affecting system performance. • We propose the GGC framework, which per-forms selective query correction through a detect-then-correct strategy and achieves a bet-ter balance between accuracy and inference efficiency. • We conduct systematic experiments and abla-tion analyses on MCQA to examine the im-pact of the Generator, Gate, Corrector, KG ex-ecution feedback, and Corrector training data composition, providing empirical evidence for building more reliable Text-to-SPARQL sys-tems. Additional results on SciQA (Auer et al., 2023), reported in Appendix D.2, further sup-port these findings. 

2 Related Work 

2.1 Knowledge Graph Question Answering 

Existing KGQA methods can generally be divided into SP-based methods and IR-based methods. SP-based methods convert natural language questions into logical forms, query graphs, or structured queries that can be executed on a knowledge graph to obtain answers (Lan et al., 2023). These methods provide relatively explicit reasoning processes, but their performance depends heavily on the quality of the generated intermediate structures. In contrast, IR-based methods retrieve relevant entities, rela-tions, or subgraphs from topic entities and obtain answers through path search or neural reasoning. They are flexible for multi-hop reasoning but are often less interpretable than explicit query-based methods. Query Graph Generation (QGG) (Lan and Jiang, 2020) and Neural State Machine-hybrid ( NSM h)(He et al., 2021) are representative methods of these two directions respectively. QGG constructs query graphs with entities, relations, constraints, and an-swer variables, while NSM h improves multi-hop reasoning by learning intermediate supervision sig-nals. Unlike these methods, we focus on the relia-bility of LLM-based Text-to-SPARQL generation, especially how to identify and correct high-risk SPARQL queries after generation. Since QGG and 

NSM h are important reference baselines on the MCQA dataset, they are included in the experi-ments for comparison. 

2.2 Text-to-SPARQL and SPARQL Semantic Parsing 

With the development of pre-trained language mod-els, Text-to-SPARQL has shifted from rule-based, template-based, and task-specific semantic parsing methods toward generation-based approaches (Lan et al., 2023). Prior work has compared BART, T5, and pointer-generator models on LC-QuAD 1.0 and LC-QuAD 2.0, showing that pre-trained mod-els provide strong baselines for SPARQL semantic parsing (Banerjee et al., 2022). Recent studies have further applied LLMs to SPARQL generation (Xu et al., 2023; D’Abramo et al., 2025) over Wikidata (Vrandeˇ ci´ c and Krötzsch, 2014). By translating NLQs into exe-cutable SPARQL queries, these methods retrieve answers from KGs through an explicit query execu-tion process, improving verifiability compared with direct answer generation. More recently, FIRES-PARQL introduced a modular LLM-based frame-work for SPARQL generation over scholarly knowl-edge graphs (Pan et al., 2025), combining fine-tuning, optional retrieval-augmented context, and query correction. These studies demonstrate the potential of LLMs for SPARQL generation, but they pay less attention to the reliability of gen-erated queries, especially executable but semanti-cally flawed queries. In contrast, our work focuses on when post-generation correction should be trig-gered. The proposed Generator–Gate–Corrector framework uses a learned Gate to selectively route only high-risk queries to the Corrector, reducing unnecessary rewriting and inference overhead. 

2.3 Constrained Generation and Error Correction in Structured Query Generation 

Text-to-SPARQL and Text-to-SQL are both natural-language-to-structured-query generation tasks that require syntactically valid and semantically correct outputs. Therefore, constrained decoding and error correction methods in Text-to-SQL provide useful references for Text-to-SPARQL. For constrained decoding, PICARD (Scholak et al., 2021) constrains autoregressive decoding through incremental parsing and rejects tokens that violate SQL syntax. For error correction, Text-to-SQL works (Chen et al., 2023; Shi et al., 2025) have shown that post-generation correction can im-prove semantic parsing accuracy, and that struc-tured clause-level editing is often more suitable than token-level editing for query repair. These studies show that improving structured query generation does not only rely on stronger ini-tial generators, but can also benefit from constraint, validation, and correction modules. 

2.4 Motivation for Selective Correction in LLM-based Text-to-SPARQL 

Existing work has advanced KGQA through graph reasoning, semantic parsing, and structured query generation. However, LLM-based Text-to-SPARQL methods still face reliability issues, where executable queries may be semantically in-consistent with the original question. Inspired by recent post-correction studies in Text-to-SQL, we explore post-correction for LLM-based Text-to-SPARQL. Unlike prior work focusing mainly on query generation, our approach emphasizes post-generation error detection and selective correction to determine when and how corrections should be applied for improved semantic consistency. 

3 Methodology 

We propose a Generator–Gate–Corrector frame-work to improve the reliability of LLM-based Text-to-SPARQL generation. Instead of correcting all generated queries, this framework first determines whether the initial SPARQL query is likely to con-tain errors, and then triggers corrections only for high-risk queries. The overall goal is to improve query accuracy while reducing unnecessary correc-tion and additional inference overhead. 

3.1 Task Formulation 

Given an NLQ, q, the objective of Text-to-SPARQL is to generate an executable SPARQL query, s. The answer set can be retrieved from the KG by execut-ing the query. Compared with general text genera-tion tasks, Text-to-SPARQL requires the generated queries to satisfy the following requirements: First, queries must conform to the syntax of SPARQL, and second, queries must be semantically consis-tent with original questions. The initial query is generated by the Generator, denoted as s(0) . If the query is determined to have potential errors, a corrected query, s(c), is generated by the Corrector. The final output query is denoted as ˆs. Therefore, we focus on how to generate s(0) 

and on how to determine whether it needs to be corrected. 

3.2 Generator-Gate-Corrector Framework 

We separate the Text-to-SPARQL process into three stages: initial generation, error detection, and selec-tive correction. The overall process is as follows: 

s(0) = G(q)

g = Gate (q, s (0) )ˆs =

(

s(0) , if g = 0 

C(q, s (0) ), if g = 1 

where G(·) denotes the Generator, C(·) denotes the Corrector, and g ∈ { 0, 1} is the binary output of the Gate. The framework is shown in Figure 1. Since not all initial SPARQL queries need to be corrected, triggering the Corrector on all queries would significantly increase inference overhead and could also corrupt queries that were initially correct. Therefore, the Gate in the framework acts as a query risk assessor, ensuring that the Corrector is triggered only on high-risk queries. 

3.3 Generator 

The objective of the Generator is to translate an NLQ, q, into an initial SPARQL query, s(0) . We use a supervised fine-tuned LLM as the Generator. During training, the input is the NLQ, and the target output is the corresponding ground-truth SPARQL Figure 1: The proposed Generator-Gate-Corrector framework for Text-to-SPARQL generation. 

query. During inference, the Generator generates an initial query s(0) based on the input question. The Generator aims to produce an initial candi-date query that is as accurate as possible. However, due to SPARQL’s strict requirements for entities, relations, constraints, and variable bindings, the Generator’s output may still contain syntactic or semantic errors. Therefore, the initial query is not directly considered the final result but is further passed to the Gate for reliability assessment. 

3.4 Gate 

The Gate is a binary classification module used to determine whether the initial SPARQL query needs correction. Its input consists of an NLQ and the initial query produced by the Generator: 

xgate = [ q; s(0) ]

The Gate outputs the probability that correction is required, and the final decision is obtained based on the threshold τ :

g = I [P (g = 1 | xgate ) ≥ τ ]

where, g = 1 indicates that the Corrector is trig-gered, and g = 0 indicates that the initial SPARQL query is kept. The default threshold is τ = 0 .5.Compared with methods that rely solely on ex-ecution feedback, the objective of the Gate is to identify queries that may contain syntactic or se-mantic errors, including executable queries that are semantically inconsistent with the NLQ. This is im-portant because many incorrect SPARQL queries are executable but return answers that do not match the question. Therefore, the Gate needs to identify not only syntactic or execution-related errors, but also potential semantic errors. 

3.5 Corrector 

The Corrector aims to revise SPARQL queries iden-tified as high-risk by the Gate. Unlike the Genera-tor, the input to the Corrector contains an NLQ and a corresponding initial SPARQL query. The objective of the Corrector is to fix potential errors in entities, relations, constraints, variable bindings, or query structure while preserving the correct parts of the initial query. During training, the Corrector takes an NLQ and an initial query produced by the Generator as input, and the corre-sponding ground-truth SPARQL query as the target output. We further consider different training data com-positions for the Corrector. Using only incorrect samples can provide a more direct correction sig-nal, while adding a certain proportion of originally correct samples can help the Corrector learn to maintain stable output when the query is already correct. The impact of different training data com-positions on correction effectiveness and stability will be examined in section 4.3. 

3.6 Training and Inference 

Both the Generator and the Corrector are trained using standard supervised fine-tuning, and train-ing samples are constructed using an instruction-response format. For the Generator, the instruction includes a task description and an NLQ, while the response is a ground-truth SPARQL query. For the Corrector, the instruction includes a task descrip-tion, an NLQ, and an initial SPARQL query, while the response is a ground-truth SPARQL query. Dur-ing training, the language modeling loss is applied only to the response portion. The Gate is trained as a separate binary classi-fier. Its training samples consist of an NLQ, an initial SPARQL query, and a binary label. If the initial query is incorrect, the label is "Correction Required". If the initial query is correct, the label is "No Correction Required". The inference procedure is summarized in Algo-rithm 1: 

Algorithm 1 Generator-Gate-Corrector Inference 

Require: Natural language question q

Ensure: Final SPARQL query ˆs 

> 1:

s(0) ← G(q) 

> 2:

g ← Gate( q, s (0) ) 

> 3:

if g = 1 then  

> 4:

s(c) ← C(q, s (0) ) 

> 5:

ˆs ← s(c) 

> 6:

else  

> 7:

ˆs ← s(0)  

> 8:

end if  

> 9:

return ˆs

Through this pipeline, the system selectively cor-rects high-risk queries, achieving a better balance between accuracy, reliability, and inference effi-ciency. 

4 Experiments and Results 

This section first introduces the experimental setup and compared systems, then presents the end-to-end framework results and ablation studies on key components, including the Generator, Gate and its threshold sensitivity, KG execution feedback, and Corrector training data composition. 

4.1 Experimental Setup Dataset The experiments were conducted on the MCQA dataset (Hoang et al., 2024). MCQA is a complex KGQA dataset for the movie domain con-structed over iMKG, a KG based on Wikidata and MovieKG. Each sample contains an NLQ, ques-tion type, topic entity, answer, and corresponding ground-truth SPARQL query. This dataset is built on a movie-domain KG and is suitable for evaluat-ing Text-to-SPARQL and KGQA methods. The dataset includes training, validation, and test sets. The training set contains 119,409 sam-ples, the validation set contains 15,785 samples, and the test set contains 31,570 samples. We use a portion of the training data to fine-tune the Gener-ator, enabling it to learn the mapping from NLQs to SPARQL queries. Then, the trained Generator        

> Setting Description
> Generator-only No correction; output s(0) .Gen. + Corr. Correct all initial queries. Gen. + Gate + Corr. Selectively correct initial queries.
> NSM hIR baseline reported in MCQA. QGG SP baseline reported in MCQA.
> Table 1: Evaluated settings and baselines. Gen. denotes the Generator, Corr. denotes the Corrector.

is used to generate initial queries on the remaining training data, and training samples for the Gate and Corrector are constructed accordingly. If the initial query generated by the Generator is incorrect, the corresponding sample is labeled "Correction Re-quired". Otherwise, it is labeled "No Correction Required". 

Compared Settings Table 1 summarizes the com-pared settings in the experiments. Generator-only evaluates the initial generation capability, while Gen. + Corr. tests the effect of correcting all ini-tial queries. Gen. + Gate + Corr. represents the proposed selective correction framework. We also include NSM h and QGG as traditional KGQA ref-erence baselines to assess end-task answer retrieval performance. Since these methods do not directly generate SPARQL queries or report query-level accuracy, their results are not strictly comparable to ours at the query level. Existing LLM-based Text-to-SPARQL methods are not included as main baselines because standardized implementations and evaluation settings remain limited. 

Implementation Details Both the Generator and Corrector are supervised fine-tuned based on Llama-3.2-3B-Instruct (Grattafiori et al., 2024), employing LoRA (Hu et al., 2022) and 4-bit quan-tized loading (Dettmers et al., 2023) to reduce train-ing costs. Both used an instruction-response format to construct training samples and applied the lan-guage modeling loss only in the response portion. The Gate is modeled as a binary classifier. We compare the RoBERTa-based (Liu et al., 2019) Gate and the SBERT-based (Reimers and Gurevych, 2019; Wang et al., 2020) Gate, and use the RoBERTa-based Gate, which performed better, as the default setting. 

Evaluation Metrics For the Generator, Corrector, and framework, we report both query-level and item-level metrics. Query-level accuracy measures the matching between the answer sets retrieved with generated SPARQL and with the ground-truth SPARQL, and is the primary evaluation metric. System Query Acc. (%) Item Prec. (%) Item Rec. (%) Item F1 (%) Infer. Time (Total / Q.)                             

> NSM h–59.20 70.06 59.44 –QGG –11.65 25.13 12.32 –Generator-only 90.23 37.96 85.76 52.63 ∼30h / ∼3.4s Gen. + Corr. (correct-all) 92.34 91.62 93.43 92.51 ∼60h / ∼6.8s Gen. + Gate + Corr. (selective) 98.33 99.62 98.70 99.16 ∼33h / ∼3.7s
> Table 2: Main results on MCQA. The proposed selective correction framework achieves the best query-level accuracy while requiring much less inference time than the correct-all baseline. Gen. denotes the Generator and Corr. denotes the Corrector. Infer.Time (Total/Q.) refers to both the total inference time on the full test set, and the average time per test question, respectively.

Item-level precision, recall, and F1 score measure the matching between the answer set obtained by the generated SPARQL and the ground-truth an-swer set, and are used for comparison with tradi-tional KGQA baselines. For the Gate, we report accuracy, precision, re-call, F1 score, false positive rate (FPR), and trigger rate. "Correction Required" is considered the pos-itive class, and the trigger rate represents the pro-portion of samples that the Gate determines need to proceed to the Corrector. The detailed experimental setup and prompt tem-plates are summarized in Appendices A and B. 

4.2 End-to-End Framework Results 

We evaluate the end-to-end GGC framework and compare it with traditional KGQA baselines on MCQA. The results are shown in Table 2. The proposed framework achieves strong overall performance, reaching 98.33% query-level accu-racy and 99.16% item-level F1. Compared with tra-ditional KGQA baselines, GGC obtains better item-level performance, showing that explicit SPARQL generation combined with selective correction can improve final answer retrieval quality. However, this comparison should be interpreted carefully because the baselines and our method optimize different objectives. Traditional KGQA baselines such as NSM h and QGG are designed for answer retrieval, while our framework explicitly generates executable SPARQL queries. Since these baselines do not report query-level accuracy, they cannot be directly compared in terms of SPARQL generation quality. Therefore, we use them as refer-ence baselines for MCQA answer retrieval, rather than as direct Text-to-SPARQL generation base-lines. Overall, the results show that the proposed GGC framework achieves competitive answer retrieval performance by additionally producing explicit SPARQL queries, improving accuracy, reliability, and inference efficiency. 

4.3 Ablation Study on the Impact of each Component 

To understand how each component contributes to the framework, we conduct ablation studies on them. We analyze the Generator-only performance, evaluate the Gate’s ability to identify high-risk queries, and study key design choices including Gate threshold, KG execution feedback, and Cor-rector training data composition. 

Generator-only Performance Generator-only achieves a query-level accuracy of 90.23%, which indicates that the fine-tuned LLM already has a con-siderable Text-to-SPARQL generation capability. However, the item-level precision is only 37.96%, significantly lower than the recall of 85.76%. These results in Table 2 indicate that although some gener-ated queries may retrieve the correct answers, they also return a large number of irrelevant answers. In other words, Generator errors are not primarily non-executable queries, but are more likely to be semantic errors such as overly broad query scope, incorrect relation selection, missing constraints, or inaccurate variable binding. To further analyze the error source of the Gen-erator, we categorized the incorrect samples into syntax error, semantic error, and ground-truth SPARQL error. The results are shown in Table 3. As can be seen, semantic errors account for 77.70% of the Generator’s errors, significantly higher than the 21.07% for syntax errors. This indicates that the main challenge of LLM-based Text-to-SPARQL is not merely generating executable queries, but rather generating queries that are semantically consistent with the NLQs. Therefore, relying solely on execu-tion failure to trigger correction is insufficient, as this approach misses a large number of executable but semantically incorrect queries. This result supports the necessity of introduc-ing the Gate. The goal of the Gate is to determine whether a query can be executed, as well as to determine whether the initial query may have se-mantic inconsistencies, thereby deciding whether the Corrector should be triggered.           

> Error Type Count Percentage (%)
> Syntax Error 650 21.07 Semantic Error 2,397 77.70 Gold SPARQL Error 38 1.23 Total 3,085 –
> Table 3: Error distribution of the Generator.

Gate Performance To evaluate whether the Gate can identify which queries require correction, we compare the Gate with two backbones, and the results are shown in Table 4. Both backbones achieved high classification per-formance, indicating that strong error signals were already present between the NLQ and the initial SPARQL query. The RoBERTa-based gate is bet-ter than the SBERT-based gate in recall and F1 score. RoBERTa’s recall reached 92.11%, mean-ing it could cover most queries that truly needed correction. Meanwhile, its FPR was only 0.31%, indicating it rarely misclassified originally correct queries. This is particularly important for the entire pipeline. If the Gate’s recall is too low, the Cor-rector will not be triggered for many incorrect queries. If the FPR is too high, the Corrector may be frequently triggered, corrupting originally correct queries. Therefore, the Gate’s role is not only to reduce inference overhead but also to per-form risk screening between correct and incorrect queries. Due to the superior overall performance of the RoBERTa-based gate, we use RoBERTa as the default Gate backbone in subsequent experiments. 

Effect of Selective Correction We further com-pare selective correction with Generator-only and Generator + Corrector, where the Corrector is ap-plied to all generated queries. As shown in Table 2, Generator-only achieves 90.23% query-level ac-curacy with approximately 30 hours of inference time. Correcting all samples increases the inference time to approximately 60 hours, but only improves query-level accuracy to 92.34%. In contrast, the complete GGC framework achieves 98.33% query-level accuracy with approx-imately 33 hours of inference time. This indicates that the Gate is essential not only for reducing com-putational cost, but also for avoiding unnecessary correction of originally correct queries. 

Gate Threshold Sensitivity We analyze whether the Gate depends on careful threshold tuning. As shown in Table 5a, varying the threshold mainly introduces a small precision–recall trade-off: lower thresholds trigger more corrections and slightly improve recall, while higher thresholds reduce false triggers and slightly improve precision. However, the overall performance remains stable. When the threshold changes from 0.25 to 0.75, the trigger rate only changes from 9.45% to 9.26%, and the F1 score remains around 94%. This sug-gests that the Gate learns stable question-query mismatch signals rather than relying on a carefully tuned threshold. We therefore use τ = 0 .5 as the default setting. 

Effect of KG Execution Feedback Intuitively, feedback from KG execution can provide useful information, such as whether the query can be ex-ecuted successfully or whether the returned result is abnormal. Therefore, we compare the with-feedback and without-feedback settings for both the Gate and the pipeline. The results in Table 5b demonstrate that KG feedback improves both Gate performance and end-to-end pipeline performance. For example, pipeline query-level accuracy increases from 98.27% to 98.70%. However, the improvement is relatively limited, especially on the main query-level metric. In contrast, the without-feedback setting avoids an additional execution step before correction, making the pipeline simpler and more efficient. Therefore, KG feedback is useful but not essen-tial. The strong without-feedback results suggest that the NLQ-SPARQL pairs already contain suffi-cient signals for detecting semantic errors. Consid-ering both performance and efficiency, the without-feedback setting is more practical as the default configuration. 

Effect of Corrector Training Data Composition 

Finally, we analyze how adding correct samples affects Corrector training. We use W to denote initially wrong queries produced by the Generator and C to denote initially correct queries. W 1.0

denotes training only on the full set of wrong sam-ples, while W 1.0 + C0.2, W 1.0 + C0.5, and 

W 1.0 + C0.8 additionally add correct samples whose sizes correspond to 20%, 50%, and 80% of all training samples, respectively. Thus, the train-ing set size increases as more correct samples are Gate Model Acc. (%) Prec. (%) Rec. (%) F1 (%) FPR (%) Trigger Rate (%)             

> RoBERTa 98.95 97.00 92.11 94.49 0.31 9.31 SBERT 98.32 96.45 86.03 90.94 0.34 8.74

Table 4: Comparison of Gate models.                                                         

> Threshold Acc. (%) Prec. (%) Rec. (%) F1 (%) FPR (%) Trigger Rate (%)
> 0.25 98.89 95.98 92.57 94.24 0.42 9.45 0.50 98.95 97.00 92.11 94.49 0.31 9.31 0.75 98.93 97.13 91.79 94.38 0.29 9.26 (a) Effect of Gate threshold.
> Setting Gate Acc. (%) Gate F1 (%) Pipeline Query Acc. (%) Pipeline Item F1 (%)
> With feedback 99.36 96.66 98.70 99.09 Without feedback 98.95 94.49 98.27 97.72 (b) Effect of KG feedback.
> Composition Query Acc. (%) Item Prec. (%) Item Rec. (%) Item F1 (%)
> W1.0 98.27 97.09 98.37 97.72 W1.0 + C0.2 98.33 99.62 98.70 99.16 W1.0 + C0.5 98.63 87.66 98.85 92.92 W1.0 + C0.8 98.80 99.66 99.00 99.33 (c) Effect of Corrector training data composition.

Table 5: Ablation results of the framework. 

added. As shown in Table 5c, adding correct samples does not weaken the Corrector. Query-level ac-curacy increases from 98.27% under W 1.0 to 98.80% under W 1.0 + C0.8, suggesting that cor-rect samples help the model preserve original correct queries and reduce unnecessary rewriting. Since larger C ratios also increase training over-head, we use W 1.0 + C0.2 as the default setting in the main experiments to balance performance and training efficiency. Item-level metrics show some fluctuation. For example, W 1.0+ C0.5 achieves higher query-level accuracy than W 1.0 + C0.2, but its item-level pre-cision and F1 are lower, possibly due to outlier queries with large answer sets. Therefore, we treat query-level accuracy as the primary metric and item-level metrics as supplementary evidence. Overall, this ablation suggests that Corrector training benefits from both repair and preservation signals: wrong samples teach correction, while cor-rect samples discourage unnecessary rewriting. Additional case studies, subset-level Gate-Corrector coordination analysis and additional dataset preliminary results are provided in Appen-dices C, D.1, and D.2. 

5 Conclusion 

In this paper, we presented a GGC framework for reliable LLM-based Text-to-SPARQL generation. The framework first generates an initial SPARQL query, uses a Gate to decide whether correction is needed, and triggers the Corrector only on high-risk queries, improving accuracy and reliability while reducing inference overhead. Experiments on the MCQA dataset show that the main errors of the Generator are executable but semantically inconsistent queries. This sug-gests that execution failure alone is insufficient for triggering correction. The Gate identifies queries requiring correction with a low FPR, and the full framework substantially improves query-level ac-curacy over both Generator-only and correct-all settings. Compared with correcting all generated queries, selective correction achieves higher accu-racy while reducing inference time by about 45%. Overall, reliable Text-to-SPARQL requires both strong generation capability and effective detection of when to correct. The proposed GGC framework demonstrates the potential of addressing this issue through a post-hoc and selective correction strategy, and we hope it will encourage further research in this direction. Limitations 

While this paper proposes a Genera-tor–Gate–Corrector framework for reliable LLM-based Text-to-SPARQL generation and demonstrates its effectiveness on MCQA, we acknowledge several limitations that warrant further exploration in future work: • The main experiments are conducted on MCQA, a movie-domain dataset with label-based SPARQL queries. Although the re-sults demonstrate the effectiveness of selec-tive correction in this setting, evaluation be-yond MCQA remains limited in scope. We provide an additional preliminary evaluation on another Text-to-SPARQL dataset in Ap-pendix D.2, but more comprehensive exper-iments across diverse domains, knowledge graphs, SPARQL formats, and model back-bones are needed to further assess the gen-eralizability of the GGC framework. In par-ticular, extending the framework to ID-based SPARQL settings may require additional en-tity linking, schema alignment, and relation grounding mechanisms. • Dependence on the Generator’s error distribu-tion. The Gate and Corrector are trained using the outputs of a specific Generator. Therefore, their performance may depend on the error patterns of that Generator. When a different or stronger base model is used, the Gate and Corrector may need to be retrained or adapted. • Additional offline computation. Although the proposed framework reduces unnecessary cor-rection during inference, constructing train-ing data for the Gate and Corrector still re-quires generating initial SPARQL queries on a large number of training samples. This in-troduces additional offline computational cost, especially when scaling to larger datasets or stronger base models. 

Ethical Considerations 

Our proposed framework focuses on improving the reliability of LLM-based Text-to-SPARQL genera-tion over knowledge graphs. The experiments are conducted on an existing KGQA dataset and do not involve collecting private user data or annotating sensitive personal information. However, if such systems are deployed in real-world applications, in-correctly generated SPARQL queries may still lead to misleading or incomplete answers, especially when the underlying knowledge graph contains outdated, biased, or incomplete facts. Therefore, practical deployment should include appropriate validation, uncertainty indication, and human over-sight in high-stakes scenarios. In addition, extend-ing the framework to open-domain or ID-based knowledge graphs may introduce risks from entity linking errors and biases encoded in the knowl-edge graph, which should be carefully examined in future work. 

Acknowledgment 

This project was supported by Nanyang Technolog-ical University under the URECA Undergraduate Research Programme. References 

S. Auer, Dante Augusto Couto Barone, Cassiano Bartz, E. Cortes, Mohamad Yaser Jaradeh, Oliver Karras, Manolis Koubarakis, Dmitry I. Mouromt-sev, Dmitrii Pliukhin, Daniil Radyush, Ivan Shilin, Markus Stocker, and Eleni Tsalapati. 2023. The sciqa scientific question answering benchmark for scholarly knowledge. Scientific Reports , 13. Debayan Banerjee, Pranav Ajit Nair, Jivat Neet Kaur, Ricardo Usbeck, and Chris Biemann. 2022. Modern baselines for sparql semantic parsing. In Proceedings of the 45th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval ,SIGIR ’22, page 2260–2265, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, and 12 others. 2020. Language models are few-shot learners. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS ’20, Red Hook, NY, USA. Curran Associates Inc. Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde De Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, and 1 others. 2021. Evaluating large language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374 .Ziru Chen, Shijie Chen, Michael White, Raymond Mooney, Ali Payani, Jayanth Srinivasa, Yu Su, and Huan Sun. 2023. Text-to-SQL error correction with language models of code. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers) , pages 1359–1372, Toronto, Canada. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Jacopo D’Abramo, Andrea Zugarini, and Paolo Torroni. 2025. Investigating large language models for text-to-SPARQL generation. In Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Knowledge-Augmented Methods for Natural Language Processing , pages 66– 80, Albuquerque, New Mexico, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Tim Dettmers, Artidoro Pagnoni, Ari Holtzman, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2023. Qlora: efficient finetuning of quantized llms. In Proceedings of the 37th Interna-tional Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS ’23, Red Hook, NY, USA. Curran Associates Inc. FacebookAI. 2024. FacebookAI/roberta-base model card. Hugging Face model card. Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Alex Vaughan, and 1 others. 2024. The llama 3 herd of models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783 .Steve Harris and Andy Seaborne. 2013. SPARQL 1.1 Query Language. W3C Recommendation. Accessed: 2026-05-23. Gaole He, Yunshi Lan, Jing Jiang, Wayne Xin Zhao, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2021. Improving multi-hop knowledge base question answering by learning intermediate supervision signals. In Proceedings of the 14th ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining , WSDM ’21, page 553–561, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Lily Hoang, Fiona Liausvia, Yan Liu, and Thanh-Son Nguyen. 2024. Semi-automated construction of com-plex knowledge base question answering dataset us-ing large language model. In Joint European Confer-ence on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases , pages 230–248. Springer. Edward J Hu, yelong shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. 2022. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations .Gregg Kellogg, Olaf Hartig, Pierre-Antoine Champin, and Andy Seaborne. 2026. RDF 1.2 Concepts and Abstract Data Model. W3C Candidate Recommen-dation Snapshot. Accessed: 2026-05-23. Yunshi Lan, Gaole He, Jinhao Jiang, Jing Jiang, Wayne Xin Zhao, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2023. Complex knowledge base question answering: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering ,35(11):11196–11215. Yunshi Lan and Jing Jiang. 2020. Query graph gen-eration for answering multi-hop complex questions from knowledge bases. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 969–974, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Man-dar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining ap-proach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692 .Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. 2019. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In International Confer-ence on Learning Representations .Shirui Pan, Linhao Luo, Yufei Wang, Chen Chen, Ji-apu Wang, and Xindong Wu. 2024. Unifying large language models and knowledge graphs: A roadmap. 

IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engi-neering , 36(7):3580–3599. Xueli Pan, Victor de Boer, and Jacco van Ossenbruggen. 2025. Firesparql: A llm-based framework for sparql query generation over scholarly knowledge graphs. In Proceedings of the 17th International Joint Con-ference on Knowledge Discovery, Knowledge Engi-neering and Knowledge Management - KDIR , pages 123–134. INSTICC, SciTePress. Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. 2019. Sentence-BERT: Sentence embeddings using Siamese BERT-networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natu-ral Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 3982–3992, Hong Kong, China. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Torsten Scholak, Nathan Schucher, and Dzmitry Bah-danau. 2021. PICARD: Parsing incrementally for constrained auto-regressive decoding from language models. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 9895–9901, Online and Punta Cana, Domini-can Republic. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Sentence Transformers. 2025. sentence-transformers/all-MiniLM-L6-v2 model card. Hugging Face model card. Liang Shi, Zhengju Tang, Nan Zhang, Xiaotong Zhang, and Zhi Yang. 2025. A survey on employing large language models for text-to-sql tasks. ACM Comput. Surv. , 58(2). Unsloth AI. 2024. unsloth/Llama-3.2-3B-Instruct. Hug-ging Face model card. Denny Vrandeˇ ci´ c and Markus Krötzsch. 2014. Wiki-data: a free collaborative knowledgebase. Commun. ACM , 57(10):78–85. Wenhui Wang, Furu Wei, Li Dong, Hangbo Bao, Nan Yang, and Ming Zhou. 2020. Minilm: deep self-attention distillation for task-agnostic compression of pre-trained transformers. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS ’20, Red Hook, NY, USA. Curran Associates Inc. Silei Xu, Shicheng Liu, Theo Culhane, Elizaveta Pert-seva, Meng-Hsi Wu, Sina Semnani, and Monica Lam. 2023. Fine-tuned LLMs know more, hallucinate less with few-shot sequence-to-sequence semantic pars-ing over Wikidata. In Proceedings of the 2023 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 5778–5791, Singapore. Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics. A Detailed Experimental Setup 

A.1 Models 

The Generator and the Corrector are fine-tuned based on “unsloth/Llama-3.2-3B-Instruct" (Un-sloth AI, 2024). The model has the following pa-rameter counts: • Total Parameters: 3,237,063,680 • Trainable Parameters: 24,313,586 The backbones of the Gate are implemented based on "FacebookAI/roberta-base" (FacebookAI, 2024) and "sentence-transformers/all-MiniLM-L6-v2" (Sentence Transformers, 2025). These models have the following parameter counts: • RoBERTa-base: ∼ 125,000,000 • all-MiniLM-L6-v2: 22,713,216 

A.2 Hyper-parameters Generator and Corrector The hyper-parameters of the Generator and the Corrector are as follows: • Maximum sequence length: 2048 • Batch size: 2 • Gradient accumulation steps: 4 • Number of epochs: 1 • Learning rate: 2 × 10 −4

• LoRA rank r: 16 • LoRA alpha: 16 • LoRA dropout: 0 • Optimizer: AdamW_8bit (Loshchilov and Hutter, 2019) • Weight Decay: 0.01 • Random seed: 3407 

Gate The hyper-parameters of the Gate are as fol-lows: • Maximum sequence length: 256 • Batch size: 8 • Number of epochs: 3 • Learning rate: 2 × 10 −5

• Random seed: 42 

A.3 Hardware and Software Environment 

All experiments were conducted on a server with the following configurations: • GPU: NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 with 24 GB VRAM. • CPU: Intel Xeon W-2295 • Memory: 256 GB • Operating System: Linux Ubuntu 22.04 • Deep learning framework: PyTorch 2.8.0 with CUDA 12.8. • LLM fine-tuning libraries: Transformers 4.55.4, Datasets 3.6.0, Unsloth 2025.9.7 • Machine learning library: scikit-learn 1.8.0. • Knowledge graph and SPARQL tools: RD-FLib 7.2.1 and LangChain 0.3.27. • Knowledge graph engine: GraphDB with a local SPARQL endpoint. 

A.4 Training Time 

Table 6 summarizes the training time of the Gen-erator, the Gates with two backbones, and the Cor-rectors with different training data compositions.                         

> Setting Training Samples Epochs Time
> Generator 12,450 1∼1h Gate-RoBERTa 88,506 3∼1h Gate-SBERT 88,506 3∼1h Corr. W1.0 11,534 1∼1h Corr. W1.0 + C0.2 14,418 1∼1.5h Corr. W1.0 + C0.5 23,068 1∼2h Corr. W1.0 + C0.8 57,670 1∼5h
> Table 6: Training time of different modules and Cor-rector data compositions. W denotes initially wrong queries generated by the Generator, and C denotes ini-tially correct queries.

B Prompt Design 

In preliminary prompting trials, the instruction model often produced outputs mixed with natural-language explanations or incomplete SPARQL frag-ments. Therefore, we use a fine-tuned model as the default Generator and Corrector setting in all main experiments. 

B.1 Prompt for the Generator 

Table 7 summarizes the prompt for the Generator. 

Training system 

You are a useful SPARQL assistant. You are tasked to review a question and generate a SPARQL query to answer the question. SPARQL Database used is WikiData. [<Entity>] is the topic entity in the question. Only use these two prefixes if needed: 

PREFIX wd: <https://www.wikidata.org/entity/> PREFIX rdfs: <http://www.w3.org/2000/01/ rdf-schema#> 

Do not use wdt syntax to query WikiData. 

user 

[Question] 

assistant 

[Ground-truth SPARQL] 

Inference system 

You are a useful SPARQL assistant. You are tasked to review a question and generate a SPARQL query to answer the question. SPARQL Database used is WikiData. [<Entity>] is the topic entity in the question. Only use these two prefixes if needed: 

PREFIX wd: <https://www.wikidata.org/entity/> PREFIX rdfs: <http://www.w3.org/2000/01/ rdf-schema#> 

Do not use wdt syntax to query WikiData. 

user 

[Question] 

assistant 

[<Generated by the model>] 

Table 7: Prompt for Generator training and inference. 

B.2 Prompt for the Corrector 

Table 8 summarizes the prompt for the Corrector. 

Training system 

You are a SPARQL corrector. You are only called when a Gate has decided that the generated SPARQL query needs fixing. Fix the generated SPARQL query based on the question. If you are not confident about a change, return the original generated SPARQL query unchanged. Do not change the question intent or invent facts. Only output the final SPARQL query, nothing else. SPARQL Database used is WikiData. Only use these two prefixes if needed: 

PREFIX wd: <https://www.wikidata.org/entity/> PREFIX rdfs: <http://www.w3.org/2000/01/ rdf-schema#> 

Do not use wdt syntax to query WikiData. 

user 

Question: [Question] SPARQL: [Initial SPARQL] 

assistant 

[Ground-truth SPARQL] 

Inference system 

You are a SPARQL corrector. You are only called when a Gate has decided that the generated SPARQL query needs fixing. Fix the generated SPARQL query based on the question. If you are not confident about a change, return the original generated SPARQL query unchanged. Do not change the question intent or invent facts. Only output the final SPARQL query, nothing else. SPARQL Database used is WikiData. Only use these two prefixes if needed: 

PREFIX wd: <https://www.wikidata.org/entity/> PREFIX rdfs: <http://www.w3.org/2000/01/ rdf-schema#> 

Do not use wdt syntax to query WikiData. 

user 

Question: [Question] SPARQL: [Initial SPARQL] 

assistant 

[<Generated by the model>] 

Table 8: Prompt for Corrector training and inference. C Case Study 

C.1 Initial SPARQL is incorrect, and Corrector successfully corrects 

In Case 1 shown in Table 9, the question is: “what are the movies that have the same actor as [Wind] and [Maxwell Caulfield] was the lead actor?”. This question requires retrieving movies that sat-isfy two conditions: they share an actor with movie 

Wind , and Maxwell Caulfield is one of the lead actors in these movies. In this case, the Generator failed to correctly represent the semantic structure. The main prob-lem is entity-relation role confusion: the model did not correctly distinguish which components should be modeled as entity labels and which should be modeled as relation labels. For instance, the gen-erated SPARQL incorrectly represented “Maxwell Caulfield” as a relation-related component rather than as an entity constraint. Simultaneously, it also failed to correctly use “starred_actors” to represent the starring relationship. In other words, while the Generator captured the keywords in the question, it failed to correctly project the semantic roles of these keywords in the KG query, leading to an error in the query logic. In contrast, the Corrector successfully fixed this problem. The corrected SPARQL correctly re-stored the role of “starred_actors” as a relation label and represented “Maxwell Caulfield” as an ex-plicit entity constraint, matching the ground-truth SPARQL. This case demonstrates that the role of the Corrector is not limited to fixing syntax errors but can effectively correct entity-relation role con-fusion, which is commonly seen in the generation stage. Especially in questions involving multiple constraints, the Corrector can help the system gen-erate a more accurate semantic structure.                      

> Question
> What are the movies that have the same actor as [Wind] and [Maxwell Caulfield] was the lead actor?
> Generator SPARQL Correctness
> False
> Corrector SPARQL Correctness
> True
> Generator SPARQL Response
> PREFIX rdfs: <http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#>
> SELECT DISTINCT ?label ?uri WHERE {?rel1 rdfs:label "Maxwell Caulfield" . ?e1 ?rel1 ?e2 ; rdfs:label "Wind" . ?uri ?rel1 ?e2 ; ?rel4 ?e4 ; rdfs:label ?label .
> FILTER (?label != "Wind") ?rel4 rdfs:label "starred_actors" . ?e4 rdfs:label "starred_actors" .}
> Corrector SPARQL Response
> PREFIX rdfs: <http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#>
> SELECT DISTINCT ?label ?uri WHERE {?rel1 rdfs:label "starred_actors" . ?e1 ?rel1 ?e2 ; rdfs:label "Wind" . ?uri ?rel1 ?e2 ; ?rel4 ?e4 ; rdfs:label ?label .
> FILTER (?label != "Wind") ?rel4 rdfs:label "starred_actors" . ?e4 rdfs:label "Maxwell Caulfield" .}
> Ground-Truth SPARQL
> PREFIX rdfs: <http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#>
> SELECT DISTINCT ?label ?uri WHERE {?rel1 rdfs:label "starred_actors" . ?e1 ?rel1 ?e2 ; rdfs:label "Wind" . ?uri ?rel1 ?e2 ; ?rel4 ?e4 ; rdfs:label ?label .
> FILTER (?label != "Wind") ?rel4 rdfs:label "starred_actors" . ?e4 rdfs:label "Maxwell Caulfield" .}

Table 9: Case study of a semantic error corrected by the Corrector. C.2 Initial SPARQL is correct, but Corrector over-corrects 

In Case 2 shown in Table 10, the question is “What does [Matthias Schoenaerts] star in and is classified as [drama]?”. This question requires retrieving movies that sat-isfy two conditions: Matthias Schoenaerts acted in them, and they are tagged as “drama”. In this case, the Generator has correctly captured the question semantics. The initial SPARQL is con-sistent with the ground-truth SPARQL in structure and constraints, correctly using “starred_actors” to represent actor relationships and “has_tags” to represent movie tag constraints. Therefore, the Generator was able to accurately express the two core conditions of the original question. However, the Corrector made unnecessary mod-ifications in this case and corrupted the origi-nally correct SPARQL. For instance, the Cor-rector incorrectly rewrote “starred_actors” repre-senting the actor relationship to “directed_by”. This incorrectly converts the question semantics from “Which movies did Matthias Schoenaerts act in?” to “Which movies did Matthias Schoe-naerts direct?”. Meanwhile, the Corrector rewrote “has_tags” to “has_genre”. Although these two re-lations appear semantically similar, they are not equivalent in the current KG. Therefore, this sub-stitution changed the original constraint structure, causing the generated SPARQL to no longer corre-spond to the ground-truth SPARQL. This case illustrates a typical risk of the Correc-tor, which is over-correction. When the Generator has already produced a correct SPARQL, the Cor-rector still attempts to rewrite it, introducing new semantic errors. This demonstrates that although the Corrector can benefit from revising many incor-rect samples, without an accurate triggering mech-anism, unnecessary correction can also disrupt the originally correct query. This case also illustrates the importance of the Gate: triggering correction only when the Generator output truly has a prob-lem can effectively reduce the negative impact of over-correction.                         

> Question
> What does [Matthias Schoenaerts] star in and is classified as [drama]?
> Generator SPARQL Correctness
> True
> Corrector SPARQL Correctness
> False
> Generator SPARQL Response
> PREFIX rdfs: <http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#>
> SELECT DISTINCT ?label ?uri WHERE {?uri ?rel1 ?e1 ; ?rel2 ?e2 ; rdfs:label ?label . ?rel1 rdfs:label "starred_actors" .?e1 rdfs:label "Matthias Schoenaerts" . ?rel2 rdfs:label "has_tags" .?e2 rdfs:label "drama" . }
> Corrector SPARQL Response
> PREFIX rdfs: <http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#>
> SELECT DISTINCT ?label ?uri WHERE {?uri ?rel1 ?e1 ; ?rel2 ?e2 ; rdfs:label ?label . ?rel1 rdfs:label "directed_by" .?e1 rdfs:label "Matthias Schoenaerts" . ?rel2 rdfs:label "has_genre" .?e2 rdfs:label "drama" . }
> Ground-Truth SPARQL
> PREFIX rdfs: <http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#>
> SELECT DISTINCT ?label ?uri WHERE {?uri ?rel1 ?e1 ; ?rel2 ?e2 ; rdfs:label ?label . ?rel1 rdfs:label "starred_actors" .?e1 rdfs:label "Matthias Schoenaerts" . ?rel2 rdfs:label "has_tags" .?e2 rdfs:label "drama" . }

Table 10: Case study of an initially correct SPARQL query corrupted by the Corrector. C.3 Neither Generator nor Corrector obtains the correct SPARQL 

In Case 3 shown in Table 11, the question is “Who wrote the movie [Toy Story 3] and also [Toy Story 2]?”. This question requires finding the author who wrote both Toy Story 3 and Toy Story 2 . The key in the SPARQL query is to model a “shared author” structure, i.e., the same author must be related to both movies through the “written_by” relationship. However, the Generator did not correctly model this logical structure. Firstly, it did not generate a complete SPARQL query. Second, it introduced a specific person who was not provided in the ques-tion. More importantly, it incorrectly compressed two different movies into one variable, making the same entity represent both Toy Story 3 and Toy Story 2 , which obviously violates the “shared au-thor” structure in the original question. This shows the Generator did not capture the core logic in the question, and instead generated an incorrect struc-ture for the overall semantic. In this case, the Corrector did not improve the Generator’s result either. Instead, it kept the origi-nal error. This indicates that, when the error is not a local label mismatch or relation constraint error, but involves logical composition, the capability of the Corrector is limited.         

> Question
> Who wrote the movie [Toy Story 3] and also [Toy Story 2]?
> Generator SPARQL Correctness
> False
> Corrector SPARQL Correctness
> False
> Generator SPARQL Response
> PREFIX rdfs: <http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#> {?movie rdfs:label "Toy Story 3" . ?author rdfs:label "John Lasseter" . ?movie rdfs:label "Toy Story 2" . }
> Corrector SPARQL Response
> PREFIX rdfs: <http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#> {?movie rdfs:label "Toy Story 3" . ?author rdfs:label "John Lasseter" . ?movie rdfs:label "Toy Story 2" . }
> Ground-Truth SPARQL
> PREFIX rdfs: <http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#>
> SELECT DISTINCT ?label ?uri WHERE {?e1 ?rel ?uri ; rdfs:label "Toy Story 3" . ?e3 ?rel ?uri ; rdfs:label "Toy Story 2" . ?rel rdfs:label "written_by" .?uri rdfs:label ?label . }

Table 11: Case study of an uncorrected SPARQL error. D Additional Ablation Study                 

> Subset W1.0 W1.0 + C0.2 W1.0 + C0.5 W1.0 + C0.8
> Correction Required 89.58 92.38 93.46 95.30 Originally Wrong 82.55 85.20 86.10 87.98 Originally Correct 99.98 99.99 99.99 99.98

Table 12: Query-level accuracy (%) on three subsets for Gate–Corrector coordination analysis. “Correction Required” denotes samples triggered by the Gate. “Originally Wrong” denotes samples incorrectly generated by the Generator. “Originally Correct” denotes samples correctly generated by the Generator. 

D.1 Subset-level Gate-Corrector Coordination 

Since the Corrector is only applied to samples that the Gate predicts as requiring correction, overall pipeline performance alone cannot fully explain how the two modules interact. Therefore, we ana-lyze query-level accuracy on three subsets: samples triggered by the Gate, samples originally generated incorrectly by the Generator, and samples origi-nally generated correctly by the Generator. This allows us to examine whether the Gate routes high-risk queries to the Corrector, whether the Corrector can repair truly wrong queries, and whether the cor-rection process damages originally correct queries. As shown in Table 12, the performance on the correction-required subset improves from 89.58% under W 1.0 to 95.30% under W 1.0 + C0.8, in-dicating that adding correct samples to Corrector training improves its stability on the actual samples routed by the Gate. A similar trend is observed on the originally wrong subset, where query-level ac-curacy increases from 82.55% to 87.98%, suggest-ing that adding correct samples does not weaken the Corrector’s repair ability. Meanwhile, perfor-mance on the originally correct subset remains nearly perfect across all settings. This indicates that the Corrector introduces very few additional er-rors when the input query is already correct. Over-all, the results show that selective correction works through the coordination of both modules: the Gate routes high-risk queries to the Corrector, while the Corrector repairs wrong queries without substan-tially damaging correct ones. 

D.2 Preliminary Results on SciQA 

We further evaluate the proposed framework on SciQA (Auer et al., 2023) as an additional dataset experiment. SciQA is a scientific question answer-ing benchmark over the Open Research Knowledge Graph (ORKG), containing NLQ-SPARQL pairs with answers retrieved from the ORKG. It contains 2,565 examples in total, with 1,795 training, 257 validation, and 513 test examples. Since SciQA dif-fers from MCQA in both domain and knowledge graph, we use it as a preliminary setting to examine whether the proposed correction mechanism can improve the same Generator backbone beyond the main MCQA setting.                    

> Error Type Count Percentage (%)
> Syntax Error 14 25.00 Semantic Error 42 75.00 Total 56 –Gold SPARQL Error 43 N/A (a) Generator error distribution. Percentages are calculated over the 56 failures attributable to the Generator. Gold SPARQL errors are not included.
> Setting Query Acc. (%) Item F1 (%)
> Generator-only 88.09 93.94 Gen. + Gate + Corr. 94.47 98.23 Gain +6.38 +4.29 (b) Results on SciQA. Gold SPARQL errors are not included.

Table 13: Analysis on SciQA. Gen. + Gate + Corr. 

denotes the Generator-Gate-Corrector framework with a RoBERTa-based Gate. 

During evaluation, 43 of the 513 SciQA test examples were found to contain gold SPARQL queries that could not be executed in our evaluation environment thus these examples are not included in the following analysis. The error distribution in Table 13a shows that most Generator-side failures are semantic errors, accounting for 42 out of 56 generator errors, or 75.00%. In contrast, syntax errors account for 14 cases, or 25.00%. This pattern is consistent with the MCQA error analysis, providing preliminary evi-dence that semantic errors are a common source of failure across different Text-to-SPARQL settings. Rather than comparing systems with different model scales or training budgets, we focus on the relative gain obtained by applying the GGC framework to the same Generator backbone. As shown in Table 13b, the framework improves query accuracy from 80.70% to 91.62%, yielding a 10.92 percentage-point gain over the Generator-only setting. It also improves item micro F1 from 93.94% to 98.31%. These results provide sup-plementary evidence that selective correction can improve SPARQL generation outside the main MCQA setting, although more comprehensive ad-ditional dataset evaluation remains an important direction for future work.