Title: Can Coding Agents Solve Repository-Level Issues with Rendered Code? An Exploratory Study of Visual Representations

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.09268v1

Published Time: Tue, 11 Aug 2026 02:35:21 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
# Can Coding Agents Solve Repository-Level Issues with Rendered Code? An Exploratory Study of Visual Representations 

Weijie Liang 1, Yuanfeng Song 2, Xing Chen 2, Caleb Chen Cao 1, Sirui Han 1, Yike Guo 1

> 1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China 

> 2

ByteDance, China 

Abstract 

Visual modality has recently been explored as a way to compress textual tokens, including rendering code as images for static code under-standing. We study whether this representation can serve as operational context for agentic cod-ing , where an agent must navigate repositories, edit source files, and verify executable patches. Using SWE-bench Verified, we evaluate ren-dered code in repository-level repair workflows and introduce controlled agent settings to sepa-rate unguided repository exploration from more structured repair stages. Our results show a mixed picture. Rendered code consistently re-duces prompt-token cost, but the savings do not increase linearly with the nominal visual compression ratio. It largely preserves end-to-end repair accuracy, but does not overcome the performance limits of the underlying model or agent architecture, and can become unstable under aggressive compression. Further anal-ysis suggests that visual code is most useful when raw source reading is a major bottleneck; once repository localization is structured, much of the remaining cost comes from patch–test trial-and-error, where visual compression has limited leverage. Overall, our study positions rendered code as a viable but conditional com-pression mechanism for realistic coding agents. 

1 Introduction 

In recent years, with the development of long-context models and agentic systems (Yao et al., 2023; Guo et al., 2024), how to efficiently represent and utilize large amounts of textual information has become an increasingly important problem. Tra-ditional approaches usually rely on retrieval, sum-marization, or selective compression, while recent line of work has begun to explore converting tex-tual information into visual forms, treating images as a compact carrier for textual context (Wei et al., 2025; Cheng et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2026a,b; Shi et al., 2026a; Liang et al., 2026). In the coding domain, this idea has also been studied by rendering source code into visual repre-sentations for code understanding and long-context code compression (Shi et al., 2026b; Zhong et al., 2026). However, existing studies mostly evalu-ate rendered code in static understanding settings, where the model is given code to “read”. Agentic coding is different: real repair agents must search across files, localize relevant regions, edit code, run tests, and revise hypotheses over long interactive trajectories. This leaves a practical gap: success in rendered-code understanding does not by itself show that visual representations can serve as effec-tive working context for coding agents. To bridge the above-mentioned gap, we pioneer a comprehensive exploratory study of rendered code as an alternative representation to raw code in real agentic coding tasks. More precisely, we evalu-ate visual code inside repository-level repair work-flows, where agents must search the codebase, in-spect relevant context, edit source files, and verify executable patches through test execution. Our exploratory study makes the following con-tributions and findings: • We provide the first systematic study of ren-dered code as operational context for agentic coding. Prior work has mainly evaluated ren-dered code as static input for passive code under-standing. We move this question into repository-level repair and find that rendered code can sub-stantially reduce token cost, but its realized sav-ings are constrained by code structure and read-ability, and therefore do not scale linearly with the nominal compression ratio. This contrasts with the smoother scaling behavior often as-sumed or empirically observed in general visual-text compression settings (Wei et al., 2025). • We introduce a controlled evaluation frame-work to study how visual modality affects autonomous repository repair agents. As overviewed in Figure 1, beyond directly test-arXiv:2608.09268v1 [cs.HC] 10 Aug 2026 Figure 1: Pipeline comparison between passive visual code understanding and agentic coding workflows.      

> The top panels contrast existing code rendering/VLM understanding with Panel ❶the unguided mini SWE-agent task workflow. The bottom panels illustrate our experimental pipeline featuring two distinct agent paradigms: ❷
> PLB (Pre-Localized Bash Agent), which uses an offline localization pass before a focused repair loop, and ❸LET (Locator-Editor Tool Agent), which dynamically splits repository actions into explicit Locator and Editor stages to systematically analyze the utility and limitations of rendered code context.

ing rendered code in mini SWE-agent workflows (Yang et al., 2024), we design two controlled agent variants, PLB (Pre-Localized Bash Agent) and LET (Locator-Editor Tool Agent). These configurations progressively decouple repository exploration, localization, source inspection, and editing, allowing us to trace where the effects of rendered code are actually realized. • We identify three mechanisms that shape agen-tic repair with rendered code. First, initial context reshapes repair behavior by compress-ing unguided exploration into the early trajectory and shifting later actions toward focused test–edit repair. Second, visual compression is most use-ful when raw source reading remains a major cost, and its marginal benefit shrinks once struc-tured repository information has already reduced source-reading demand. Third, downstream trial-and-error matters more than repository under-standing alone: even with better localization, final resolution is often dominated by editing, testing, and patch refinement. 

2 Related Work 

Context Compression and Visual Information Representation. The computational cost of Transformer-style language models grows with the number of input tokens, making context repre-sentation a central bottleneck for long-document and interactive tasks (Vaswani et al., 2017). Alarge body of work therefore studies how to ex-pose only the most useful information to the model, with retrieval-augmented generation and related retrieval-centric methods being the most represen-tative direction (Lewis et al., 2020; Karpukhin et al., 2020; Izacard and Grave, 2021; Guu et al., 2020). Another line compresses textual context through prompt-level rewriting, including summarization, learned compression, and selective token retention (Xu et al., 2024; Jiang et al., 2023, 2024; Li et al., 2023). In this sense, they shorten context by trans-forming the original textual information. Recent work explores a complementary route: changing the representation modality itself, us-ing visual inputs as a dense carrier for the same textual information. DeepSeek-OCR (Wei et al., 2025) studies optical 2D mappings for compressing text into images, while Glyph (Cheng et al., 2025) shows that rendered text can replace part of raw textual context in long-text question answering. Other systems push this idea beyond document compression. VTC-R1 (Wang et al., 2026a) incor-porates visual text compression into a reasoning pipeline, while Render-of-Thought (Wang et al., 2026b) renders intermediate reasoning traces so that chain-of-thought can be stored and consumed through the visual channel. MemOCR (Shi et al., 2026a) and VizoMem (Liang et al., 2026) explore visual memory representations for organizing ac-cumulated long-horizon information. This per-spective naturally extends to the coding domain, where source code constitutes a structured textual-symbolic artifact that can be transformed into vi-sual representations. 

Coding Agents for Repository-Level Software Engineering. Repository-level coding benchmarks have shifted code generation from isolated func-tion synthesis toward realistic software mainte-nance. SWE-bench and SWE-bench Verified eval-uate agents on real GitHub issues, requiring them to localize repository context, edit the implemen-tation, and pass project tests (Jimenez et al., 2024; Chowdhury et al., 2024). This setting has motivated coding agents and repair systems that combine lan-guage models with repository search, shell interac-tion, editing, and test feedback, including SWE-agent, AutoCodeRover, Agentless, and broader software engineering agent frameworks such as OpenHands (Yang et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024; Xia et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025). In parallel, CodeOCR (Shi et al., 2026b) and LongCodeOCR (Zhong et al., 2026) explore rendered code as a vi-sual representation of source code: by controlling image resolution, code can be directly compressed in the visual space while vision-language models still retain code understanding ability. However, understanding rendered code remains a largely passive setting, while agentic repair re-quires the model to actively acquire context by deciding which files and regions to inspect, use the resulting evidence to edit code and test over long interactive trajectories. This leaves a practical gap between rendered-code understanding and agentic software repair. To our knowledge, our work is the first to study whether visually rendered code can serve as operational context for repository-level coding agents, and where its effect appears across the repair procedure. 

3 From Visual Code Understanding to Repository-Level Repair 

CodeOCR and LongCodeOCR established that VLMs can understand rendered code in isolation. Agentic coding is a different regime: rendered code must serve as a working context inside an interac-search                

> 31.0%
> read
> 40.1%
> test 13.6%
> edit
> 3.3%
> misc
> 11.9%
> Action Share by Steps
> 020 40 60 80 100 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Average Action Ratio
> Lower difficulty
> 020 40 60 80 100 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Higher difficulty
> Average Action Trend over Normalized Mini Trajectories
> read search test edit misc

Figure 2: Action distribution and temporal action trends of mini SWE-agent v2 on SWE-bench Verified. Read-/search actions dominate across both lower- and higher-difficulty tasks, and remain distributed throughout the normalized repair process. Difficulty groups are defined by the steps used to solve each task. 

tive, repository-level workflow, where the agent navigates, edits, and verifies patches via test execu-tion. The question we study is whether visual code retains its benefits once it is embedded in this loop, and where those benefits are actually realized. We approach this in three layers. First, we set up the agentic task and identify the attribution chal-lenge that evaluation must face (§3.1). Second, we examine the rendering pipeline itself and show that its cost surface is fundamentally non-smooth in the nominal compression ratio (§3.2). With both pieces in hand, we then introduce the shared protocol and controlled progression of the agent configurations used in the main study (§4). 

3.1 Setup: Agentic Coding and the Attribution Challenge 

A repository-level repair instance is defined by an issue description I and a repository R consisting of source files, tests, and project metadata. Given 

(I, R), the agent must inspect the repository and produce a patch P = π(I, R) that passes both fail-to-pass tests TF2P and pass-to-pass tests TP2P :

Pass( R ⊕ P, TF2P ) ∧ Pass( R ⊕ P, TP2P ). (1) The default solving paradigm is the bash-based mini SWE-agent (we adopt the v2 version), a lightweight agent that interacts with repositories via shell commands and mixes repository search, file inspection, code editing, test execution, and feedback inspection inside a single command-line trajectory. Figure 2 shows how the five action types are distributed across the task trajectory; details are provided in Appendix A. Two observations matter for our purposes. First, read and search ac-tions dominate the trajectory. Second, code reading is distributed across the entire normalized repair process rather than confined to an initial localiza-tion stage, i.e., the agent repeatedly performs ex-ploratory search + read interleaved with editing, testing, and feedback inspection. This creates an attribution challenge for visual evaluation. Visual compression changes only how raw code is represented, while a bash trajectory also contains substantial non-code context, such as search outputs, test results, and patch feedback. Replacing textual code views with rendered images therefore perturbs only part of the interaction his-tory, and the exploration loop may amplify or dilute this effect. A single end-to-end text-to-visual swap cannot tell whether observed changes come from the visual modality itself, trajectory variance, or their interaction. This is the gap between visual code understanding and repository-level agentic tasks: the model is no longer evaluated on a clean reading event, and the modality effect becomes entangled with search, editing, and verification. 

3.2 Analysis of the Visual Code Cost Surface 

We first describe the rendering pipeline, since its cost–output behavior determines what any visual experiment can ultimately reveal. Let x denote a code window and r ∈ R>0 a nom-inal compression ratio. The renderer maps (x, r ) to a target visual budget and searches over a finite set of layout configurations θ ∈ Θ, where each con-figuration specifies properties such as resolution, pagination, and font size. The selected layout 

θ∗(x, r ) = arg min  

> θ∈Θ

L R(x; θ), B (x, r )

balances target-budget matching against layout ef-ficiency and page overhead. Here, B(x, r ) denotes the renderer-side target budget induced by code window x and nominal ratio r, while R(x; θ) denotes the rendered visual output under layout configuration θ. Detailed ren-dering settings, search space, and implementation choices are given in Appendix B. However, this code rendering pipeline has several intrinsic prop-erties that directly affect its cost behavior. 

(Property 1) Discrete realizability: Although the nominal budget varies continuously, the renderer searches over a discrete candidate set Θ. As a result, many nearby budgets collapse to the same rendered layout and hence the same realized cost. 

(Property 2) Piecewise-constant tokenization: 

Image-token cost changes only when a rendered image crosses a patch or tile boundary. Once a layout falls into the minimum active token bucket, text r1 r2 r3 r5 r7 Condition 02000 4000 Prompt tokens      

> Visual Prompt Tokens text r1 r2 r3 r5 r7 Condition 025 50 75 100 Visual / raw text (%)  Visual Cost Relative to Raw Text 10 lines 30 lines 50 lines 100 lines 200 lines 300 lines 400 lines 500 lines

Figure 3: Single-read visual token cost across varying window sizes and nominal compression ratios. The two panels jointly show that token counts do not decrease lin-early: small windows rapidly encounter an operational cost floor because they collapse to the same rendering configuration. Higher compression ratios become ef-fective only for more extreme large-window settings, reducing cost to 15%–40% of raw text, but with dimin-ishing marginal returns and inherent readability risks. 

further changes in resolution may degrade readabil-ity without changing token cost. 

(Property 3) Code is visually sparse: Indenta-tion, blank lines, and short statements leave sub-stantial unused space in rendered code, while line-preserving pagination further limits page density. Hence, the renderer must balance per-page density and page count rather than simply shrinking fonts. To validate these effects on real repository code, we run a single-read rendering study over sampled source-code windows. We render windows of dif-ferent sizes under each nominal ratio and measure the resulting prompt-token cost without introduc-ing multi-turn agent interaction. Figure 3 shows that visual rendering already re-duces cost at r=1 , suggesting that modality conver-sion itself provides a denser representation than raw text tokenization. However, increasing the nominal ratio does not produce smooth or proportional sav-ings. For small windows, the visual cost quickly reaches a floor: for example, 10-line windows cost 54.0 tokens for all r≥2. Clearer savings appear only for larger windows, but the need to preserve code structure and readability imposes a practical ceiling, leading to diminishing marginal returns. We also observe that at higher r, rendered code can sometimes suffer from readability failures, in-troducing a practical trade-off beyond token cost. The full token values and readability examples are provided in Appendix B.2. This matters for repository-level agents because they usually need small targeted regions rather than broad context. Large rendered windows may ap-pear efficient under visual compression, but also include irrelevant code beyond the useful evidence. 

4 Controlled Experimental Design and Framework 

The attribution challenge in §3.1 and the non-smooth cost surface in §3.2 make a single text-to-visual swap difficult to interpret. As shown in Figure 1, we therefore evaluate visual code through a controlled progression of three agent configurations: the official mini SWE-agent base-line (mini), the Pre-Localized Bash Agent (PLB), and the Locator–Editor Tool Agent (LET). Below, we summarize the key design of each configuration (details are provided in Appendix C). 

4.1 mini SWE-agent Baseline 

We use the official mini SWE-agent v2 (Yang et al., 2024) as our baseline, since it is designed to eval-uate the model’s coding ability in a fair, standard setting. It runs a single-stage bash-first ReAct (Yao et al., 2023) loop with the full mix of repository ex-ploration, code reading, editing, and test execution. 

4.2 Shared Protocol for PLB and LET Evaluation protocol. All configurations share the same evaluation. We sample 100 instances from SWE-bench Verified under a fixed seed, strat-ified so that every repository represented in the full benchmark appears in the subset. All con-figurations use the same backbone Mθ, rendering pipeline, official SWE-bench harness, and are eval-uated under one text condition and four visual con-ditions indexed by r ∈ { 1, 3, 5, 7}. For each (in-stance, condition) pair, we run a single trajectory and report pass@1 correctness under the official SWE-bench evaluation (Eq. 1), together with total prompt-token consumption over the full trajectory. 

Repository indexing. Both PLB and LET share a static repository index. For each repository, we parse every Python source file with a tree-sitter parser (Brunsfeld, 2018) and extract each top-level and nested function, class, and method as a sym-bol σ, storing its file path, kind, qualified name, line span, parent, base classes, and call set. On top of these per-symbol records we construct a lightweight repository graph G whose edges en-code parent–member, file-import, inheritance, and call relations. The resulting static index is 

I(REPO ) =  Σ, F, G, B,

where Σ is the symbol set, F the directory tree, 

G the lightweight graph, and B a sparse BM25 retriever over the chunk-text corpus {chunk( σ) : 

σ ∈ Σ}. With the repository organized as I, a textual query q localizes repository context by re-turning the top-k matched symbols together with their aligned chunk text, 

R(q; I) =  (σ(i), c (i))ki=1 , c (i) = chunk( σ(i)).

Localize and Package operators. On top of I

we define two procedures that are shared by both PLB and LET and treated as structured repository tools. Let q denote a textual query, typically syn-thesized from the issue text x. We write Dloc and 

Dpkg for the concrete system-side implementations of the Localize and Package operators. Localize 

performs coarse repository localization: 

L(x, q ) = Dloc 

 x, q, R(q; I), G .

Operationally, Localize combines retrieved symbol chunks with issue-aware matching and lightweight graph expansion to produce ranked candidate files and fault-relevant symbols. Package then refines these candidates into a structured context package: 

P(x, q ) = Dpkg 

 x, q, L(x, q ), I,

which uses the coarse candidates implied by 

L(x, q ) to retrieve finer-grained repository evi-dence and serialize it into a compact multi-view context package. PLB invokes L and P once offline to produce the pre-localization brief eL(x) and pack-age ˆP(x), while LET exposes them as online tools for the locator. Implementation details, prompt templates, plan schemas, and visual-intervention boundaries are provided in Appendix C. 

4.3 Pre-Localized Bash Agent (PLB) 

PLB keeps the same bash-first interaction style as mini, but prepends an offline pre-localization pass before the online repair loop. The motivation is to reduce the bias introduced by unguided exploration, which can strongly perturb long trajectories and is orthogonal to the modality effect we want to study. For each instance, we set q := x, retrieve 

R(x; I) from the shared repository index, and use two single-shot LLM calls to produce a compact starting package 

eP(x) = E pkg 

 Mθ(πpkg (x, R(x; I), eL(x))) ,

where eL(x) is an intermediate localization brief produced by an analogous call. The package is computed once per instance, shared across text and visual conditions, and provided as the agent’s start-ing context. The agent then runs the same bash-first loop until submit ; under visual conditions, source-code outputs from the model’s code-reading commands are rendered as images, while non-code outputs remain in text form. PLB therefore evalu-ates visual rendering in a setting that remains close to the model’s native bash-based workflow, while suppressing part of the trajectory variance caused by unconstrained repository exploration. 

4.4 Locator–Editor Tool Agent (LET) 

LET adopts a two-stage decoupled design that sepa-rates repository exploration from the trial-and-error editing stage. This allows us to study whether ren-dered raw code still adds value when the agent already accesses structured repository information. 

Locator. In the locator phase, the agent oper-ates with tools { Localize , Package , view_code ,

commit_plan }. Here Localize and Package cor-respond to the shared operators L and P. In the locator phase, the agent iteratively localizes likely edit sites, packages candidate context, and inspects source windows via view_code .

Handoff. The locator phase ends by emitting a committed plan Π( x) with likely targets, a repro-duction command, issue-relevant evidence, and ref-erenced source code windows. The full locator transcript is then discarded. 

Editor. The editor starts from plan Π( x) and oper-ates with { Localize , Package , view_code , bash ,

submit }. It retains the repository-reading tools for evidence re-checking, while the main focus of this phase is editing and test execution through bash .We keep repair in bash based on our preliminary trials: adding separate editing tools introduced re-dundant interactions and consistently weakened end-to-end performance. 

5 Results and Analysis 

5.1 Initial Context Reshapes Repair Behavior 

Mini exhibits the most interleaved behavior throughout the trajectory, making visual effects 0 20 40 60 80 100          

> Action Share (%) mini PLB
> Overall Action Mix
> 020 40 60 80 100
> Normalized Trajectory Progress (%)
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Average Action Ratio
> Continuous Trend
> Average Action Trend over Normalized PLB Trajectories
> bash_read bash_search bash_test bash_edit misc

Figure 4: Behavioral shift from mini to PLB. Pre-localization reduces unguided repository exploration, with read actions declining over time. 0 20 40 60 80 100         

> Action Share (%) overall locator editor
> Phase-wise Action Mix
> 025 50 75 100
> Normalized Progress (%)
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Average Action Ratio
> Locator
> 025 50 75 100
> Normalized Progress (%)
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Editor
> Average Action Trend over Normalized LET Trajectories
> view_code Localize Package bash_search bash_read bash_test bash_edit misc

Figure 5: Behavioral decomposition of LET. The loca-tor is dedicated to repository understanding, while the editor focuses on trial-and-error repair. 

hard to attribute. Figures 2, 4, and 5 isolate pro-gressively cleaner behavioral regimes. 

Pre-localization compresses unguided explo-ration into the early trajectory, allowing later behavior to shift toward focused test–edit repair. 

Compared with Mini, PLB enters the main repair loop with an initial starting point, and therefore no longer needs to sustain broad exploration through-out the trajectory. The action mix reflects this shift: in Mini, read and search account for 40.1% and 31.0% of actions, whereas in PLB, the cor-responding bash_read and bash_search shares drop to 19.2% and 16.7%; meanwhile, bash_test 

becomes dominant at 54.8%. The normalized tra-jectory further shows that PLB does not remove exploration, but concentrates source re-checking and localization confirmation in the early stage; later behavior shifts toward test feedback, patch editing, and iterative repair. 

A more precise starting point, does not fun-damentally change the focused repair pattern. 

LET moves repository understanding into the lo-cator stage, where the locator can repeatedly call 

Localize and Package to narrow the candidate context. However, once control passes to the editor, the behavior does not further collapse into a simple edit–test routine merely because the preceding loca-tor has provided more precise candidates. Instead, the editor still follows a PLB-like repair pattern, involving source re-checking, test feedback, and Table 1: Raw accuracy and average prompt-token cost on Qwen3.5. Tokens are in millions; token-gain columns report text reduction over mini and visual reduction over mini. 

agent scope Accuracy (%) Avg tokens (M) Token reduction mini text r=1 r=3 r=5 r=7 mini text r=1 r=3 r=5 r=7 text visual range PLB normal 70.0 72.0 73.0 71.0 69.0 70.0 4.13 2.91 2.43 1.72 1.47 1.53 1.42 × 1.70 –2.81 ×

wide 70.0 70.0 72.0 71.0 70.0 71.0 4.13 3.13 2.88 2.27 1.95 2.03 1.32 × 1.43 –2.12 ×

LET normal 70.0 69.0 68.0 70.0 65.0 64.0 4.13 1.94 1.84 1.69 1.74 1.78 2.13 × 2.24 –2.44 ×

wide 70.0 67.0 69.0 69.0 68.0 66.0 4.13 1.73 1.78 1.80 1.77 1.64 2.39 × 2.29 –2.52 ×

> Table 2: Raw accuracy and average prompt-token cost on Kimi-K2.5. Tokens are in millions; token-gain columns report text reduction over mini and visual reduction over mini.

agent scope Accuracy (%) Avg tokens (M) Token reduction mini text r=1 r=3 r=5 r=7 mini text r=1 r=3 r=5 r=7 text visual PLB normal 69.0 69.0 70.0 69.0 65.0 70.0 2.68 2.27 2.13 1.44 1.04 1.17 1.18 × 1.26 –2.58 ×

wide 69.0 71.0 72.0 69.0 69.0 71.0 2.68 2.38 2.30 2.27 2.08 1.97 1.12 × 1.17 –1.36 ×

LET normal 69.0 68.0 68.0 70.0 64.0 60.0 2.68 1.14 1.21 1.01 1.03 1.14 2.35 × 2.21 –2.65 ×

wide 69.0 67.0 69.0 65.0 65.0 66.0 2.68 1.09 1.40 1.38 1.47 1.10 2.46 × 1.82 –2.44 ×

patch iteration around the given context. Thus, LET shows that the locator changes the editor’s infor-mation boundary, but not its core repair dynamics. Final resolution still depends on whether the edi-tor can effectively use this information within the focused repair loop. 

5.2 Visual Compression in Agentic Repair 

We evaluate each agent under two inspection scopes. In the normal scope, the prompt provides a recommended repair path; in the wide scope, the prompt explicitly encourages the agent to inspect broader repository context and code windows. All prompt templates are provided in Appendix F. 

Accuracy is mostly preserved. Across both back-bones, PLB and LET generally remain in the same accuracy band as mini. Since each condition con-tains 100 tasks, single-digit percentage-point fluc-tuations should be interpreted as task-level varia-tion rather than a monotonic effect of visual com-pression. However, aggressive compression can weaken this stability: the main exception appears in the LET setting, where the lowest accuracy drops to 60.0%; by contrast, PLB is more stable overall. This difference is related to how the two pipelines organize information and structure the repair pro-cess, which we discuss further below. 

Visual compression is most beneficial when raw source reading remains a major cost. The PLB text condition already reduces part of the overhead by limiting unguided repository exploration. How-ever, within this cleaner repair loop, the agent’s repository understanding still relies primarily on source-code reading, so rendered code can further reduce the reading cost. The largest PLB reductions reach 2.81 × on Qwen3.5 and 2.58 × on Kimi-K2.5, both under the normal scope. By contrast, the gains are smaller under the wide scope, because broader inspection introduces more context beyond what is needed as repair evidence, consistent with §3.2. Moreover, the reduction is not monotonic in r, re-flecting both the non-smooth rendering cost surface and repeated calls caused by reduced readability in some rendered code. 

When structured repository information already reduces source-reading demand, visual com-pression has smaller marginal gains. Compared with PLB, LET further reduces token usage, show-ing that structured localization and packaging al-ready make repository navigation cheaper. Rela-tive to mini, its largest reductions reach 2.52 × on Qwen3.5 and 2.65 × on Kimi-K2.5. However, be-cause the LET text baseline is already compact, visualizing raw code brings smaller and less stable additional gains. This suggests that visual compres-sion is best suited to settings where raw source read-ing remains a major cost; once structured repository information reduces that demand, the remaining overhead comes more from editing, testing, and patch iteration. Table 3: LET cost breakdown on Kimi-K2.5. The top block reports the phase-level token split; the bottom block reports editor-cost buckets by locator evidence and final outcome.                             

> Phase-level token split
> group locator editor all 0.19M / 23.7% 1.18M / 76.3% resolved 0.18M / 28.0% 0.83M / 72.0% non-resolved 0.22M / 16.3% 1.78M / 83.7%
> Editor-cost buckets
> bucket share avg editor tok. high evidence, ✓54.5% 0.72M high evidence, ×12.0% 1.77M mid evidence, ✓4.0% 1.15M mid evidence, ×9.5% 1.75M low evidence, ✓4.8% 1.84M low evidence, ×15.2% 1.80M

5.3 Locator–Editor Contribution Analysis Trial-and-Error Matters More Than Under-standing the Repository. The two-stage LET de-composition further shows that more precise local-ization does not automatically translate into lower repair cost; it mainly changes the editor’s starting point, rather than the downstream trial-and-error process itself. We use Kimi-K2.5 as a representa-tive case. As shown in Table 3, the locator accounts for only a small fraction of the total cost, while the editor consumes most of the tokens. This imbal-ance becomes even stronger on non-resolved tasks, where the editor accounts for 83.7% of the total token cost. Thus, once LET proposes a candidate repair direction, the dominant cost shifts to the editor-side edit–test–verify loop. We then relate locator coverage to editor cost. For each LET task, we measure whether the loca-tor commits patch-relevant snippets and whether its observed source windows cover the gold-patch region. Figure 6 shows that coverage is positively correlated with resolution, but the relationship is not deterministic. Better coverage improves the ed-itor’s initial condition, but does not guarantee that the downstream patch will be correctly generated, tested, and refined. The editor-cost buckets make this distinction clearer (Table 3). High-evidence tasks that resolve are the cheapest, requiring only 0.72M editor to-kens on average. However, once high-evidence tasks fail, their editor cost still rises to a level comparable to other failures. Conversely, some low-evidence tasks can still be rescued, but only through a more expensive trial-and-error process. Therefore, localization mainly helps by increasing 0 20 40 60 80 100     

> Snippet coverage (%)
> 020 40 60 80 100
> Evidence coverage (%)
> (snippet ,y) = 0.475
> (evidence ,y) = 0.522
> joint (snippet ,evidence ;y) = 0.549
> Resolved Tasks by Locator Coverage

Figure 6: Task-level LET outcomes by locator coverage. Each bubble aggregates runs with the same snippet and evidence coverage; green denotes resolved outcomes and gray denotes non-resolved outcomes. 

the chance that a task enters the low-cost “high-evidence and resolved” regime. In difficult cases, the remaining cost is driven by repeated verifica-tion, error correction, and patch refinement within the patch–test loop. 

6 Conclusion 

We studied whether rendered code can serve as operational context for repository-level cod-ing agents, beyond static code-understanding set-tings. On SWE-bench Verified, across Kimi-K2.5 and Qwen3.5, rendered code consistently reduces prompt-token cost while largely preserving end-to-end repair accuracy. However, the benefit is not a simple function of the nominal compression ratio: rendering cost is non-smooth, further compression does not always yield further token savings, and aggressive settings can make accuracy less stable. Our controlled agent progression clarifies where this benefit comes from. PLB shows that rendered code is most useful when repository understanding still depends heavily on raw source-code reading, where visual representation can substantially re-duce the cost of inspection. LET shows the com-plementary limit: once structured localization and packaging reduce the need for raw-code reading, much of the remaining cost shifts to editing, test-ing, and patch iteration. In this regime, visual com-pression still helps in some cases, but its marginal benefit becomes smaller and less reliable. Overall, our results suggest that rendered code is a viable compression mechanism for coding agents, but its benefit is conditional on whether raw source reading remains a real bottleneck. For repository-level repair, the central challenge is therefore not only how to compress code, but how to place that compression inside the broader edit workflow. Limitations 

Evaluation Scope and Generalizability. While this exploratory study spans multiple multimodal backbones and a wide array of repository types, the findings reflect a controlled evaluation envi-ronment. Therefore, these initial insights warrant further validation in production-grade enterprise environments before extending these findings to definitive implementations of large-scale produc-tion solutions. 

Agent Abstractions and Production Orchestra-tion. Our evaluation relies on PLB and LET as controlled, rigorous abstractions designed for clean attribution, rather than exhaustive production-grade configurations. While practical industrial orches-trations or multi-agent workflows may integrate advanced planning, retrieval, long-term memory, and collaborative verification, our decoupled frame-work serves as a vital blueprint. These initial in-sights establish foundational principles that help navigate where visual context can be most strategi-cally deployed when transitioning to highly com-plex, enterprise-scale agentic systems. 

References 

Max Brunsfeld. 2018. Tree-sitter: An incremental parsing system for programming tools. https: //tree-sitter.github.io/tree-sitter/ . Ac-cessed: 2026-05-19. Jiale Cheng, Yusen Liu, Xinyu Zhang, Yulin Fei, Wenyi Hong, Ruiliang Lyu, Weihan Wang, Zhe Su, Xiao-tao Gu, Xiao Liu, Yushi Bai, Jie Tang, Hongning Wang, and Minlie Huang. 2025. Glyph: Scaling con-text windows via visual-text compression. Preprint ,arXiv:2510.17800. Neil Chowdhury, James Aung, Chan Jun Shern, Oliver Jaffe, Dane Sherburn, Giulio Starace, Evan Mays, Rachel Dias, Marwan Aljubeh, Mia Glaese, Carlos E. Jimenez, John Yang, Leyton Ho, Tejal Patwardhan, Kevin Liu, and Aleksander Madry. 2024. Introducing SWE-bench verified. Taicheng Guo, Xiuying Chen, Yaqi Wang, Ruidi Chang, Shichao Pei, Nitesh V. Chawla, Olaf Wiest, and Xi-angliang Zhang. 2024. Large language model based multi-agents: a survey of progress and challenges. In 

Proceedings of the Thirty-Third International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence , IJCAI ’24. Kelvin Guu, Kenton Lee, Zora Tung, Panupong Pasu-pat, and Ming-Wei Chang. 2020. Realm: Retrieval-augmented language model pre-training. Preprint ,arXiv:2002.08909. Gautier Izacard and Edouard Grave. 2021. Leveraging passage retrieval with generative models for open do-main question answering. In Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the European Chapter of the Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics: Main Volume ,pages 874–880, Online. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Huiqiang Jiang, Qianhui Wu, , Xufang Luo, Dong-sheng Li, Chin-Yew Lin, Yuqing Yang, and Lili Qiu. 2024. LongLLMLingua: Accelerating and enhanc-ing LLMs in long context scenarios via prompt com-pression. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-ume 1: Long Papers) , pages 1658–1677, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. Huiqiang Jiang, Qianhui Wu, Chin-Yew Lin, Yuqing Yang, and Lili Qiu. 2023. LLMLingua: Compressing prompts for accelerated inference of large language models. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-ing , pages 13358–13376, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguistics. Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik R Narasimhan. 2024. SWE-bench: Can language mod-els resolve real-world github issues? In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .Vladimir Karpukhin, Barlas Oguz, Sewon Min, Patrick Lewis, Ledell Wu, Sergey Edunov, Danqi Chen, and Wen-tau Yih. 2020. Dense passage retrieval for open-domain question answering. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages 6769–6781, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Hein-rich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rock-täschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. 2020. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. In Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems , volume 33, pages 9459– 9474. Curran Associates, Inc. Yucheng Li, Bo Dong, Frank Guerin, and Chenghua Lin. 2023. Compressing context to enhance inference ef-ficiency of large language models. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-ral Language Processing , pages 6342–6353, Singa-pore. Association for Computational Linguistics. Weijie Liang, Yuanfeng Song, Xing Chen, Caleb Chen Cao, Sirui Han, and Yike Guo. 2026. Vizomem: A visual-textual memory framework for efficient long-horizon reasoning. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2026 .Yaorui Shi, Shugui Liu, Yu Yang, Wenyu Mao, Yuxin Chen, Qi GU, Hui Su, Xunliang Cai, Xiang Wang, and An Zhang. 2026a. Memocr: Layout-aware vi-sual memory for efficient long-horizon reasoning. 

Preprint , arXiv:2601.21468. Yuling Shi, Chaoxiang Xie, Zhensu Sun, Yeheng Chen, Chenxu Zhang, Longfei Yun, Chengcheng Wan, Hongyu Zhang, David Lo, and Xiaodong Gu. 2026b. Codeocr: On the effectiveness of vision language models in code understanding. Preprint ,arXiv:2602.01785. Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Ł ukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc. Xingyao Wang, Boxuan Li, Yufan Song, Frank F. Xu, Xiangru Tang, Mingchen Zhuge, Jiayi Pan, Yueqi Song, Bowen Li, Jaskirat Singh, Hoang H. Tran, Fuqiang Li, Ren Ma, Mingzhang Zheng, Bill Qian, Yanjun Shao, Niklas Muennighoff, Yizhe Zhang, Binyuan Hui, and 5 others. 2025. Openhands: An open platform for AI software developers as gener-alist agents. In The Thirteenth International Confer-ence on Learning Representations .Yibo Wang, Yongcheng Jing, Shunyu Liu, Hao Guan, Rong cheng Tu, Chengyu Wang, Jun Huang, and Dacheng Tao. 2026a. Vtc-r1: Vision-text compres-sion for efficient long-context reasoning. Preprint ,arXiv:2601.22069. Yifan Wang, Shiyu Li, Peiming Li, Xiaochen Yang, Yang Tang, and Zheng Wei. 2026b. Render-of-thought: Rendering textual chain-of-thought as images for visual latent reasoning. CoRR ,abs/2601.14750. Haoran Wei, Yaofeng Sun, and Yukun Li. 2025. Deepseek-ocr: Contexts optical compression. 

Preprint , arXiv:2510.18234. Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yinlin Deng, Soren Dunn, and Lingming Zhang. 2024. Agentless: Demystifying llm-based software engineering agents. Preprint ,arXiv:2407.01489. Fangyuan Xu, Weijia Shi, and Eunsol Choi. 2024. RE-COMP: Improving retrieval-augmented LMs with context compression and selective augmentation. In 

The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations .John Yang, Carlos E Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kil-ian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. 2024. SWE-agent: Agent-computer inter-faces enable automated software engineering. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems .Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2023. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations .Yuntong Zhang, Haifeng Ruan, Zhiyu Fan, and Abhik Roychoudhury. 2024. Autocoderover: Autonomous program improvement. Preprint , arXiv:2404.05427. Jianping Zhong, Guochang Li, Chen Zhi, Junxiao Han, Zhen Qin, Xinkui Zhao, Nan Wang, Shuiguang Deng, and Jianwei Yin. 2026. Can vision-language models handle long-context code? an empirical study on visual compression. Preprint , arXiv:2602.00746. A Action Type Categorization 

For Figure 2 we categorize each bash command emitted by mini SWE-agent v2 into one of five action types based on the command verb and its observed effect on the repository state: • Read : source-reading commands that return code-bearing stdout (e.g., cat , sed -n , head ,

tail , nl -ba with line slicing, and file view-ers wrapped in similar idioms). • Search : repository navigation and lookup commands that return non-code listings (e.g., 

ls , find , grep , rg , directory tree inspection). • Edit : commands that mutate repository files (in-place editors, redirection into a file, patch application). • Test : commands that execute the project test suite or a reproduction script (e.g., pytest ,

python -m unittest , project-local runners, repro scripts). • Misc : remaining shell actions that do not fit the four categories above, including envi-ronment setup, dependency inspection, shell plumbing, and short diagnostic commands whose output is not classified as source read-ing, repository search, editing, or testing. The temporal-trend panel of Figure 2 bins each tra-jectory step by its normalized position t/T within that trajectory before aggregating across instances. 

B Rendering Pipeline and Examples 

B.1 Rendering Pipeline Details Rendering objective. Given a code window x

and a nominal compression ratio r ≥ 1, the ren-derer maps r to a target visual budget 

B(x, r ) = bTtext (x)

r ,

where bTtext (x) is the renderer-side text-cost proxy. It then selects a rendering configuration θ =(ρ, f, p ) by solving 

θ∗(x, r ) = arg min  

> θ∈Θ

L R(x; θ), B (x, r ),

where L balances target-budget matching against layout efficiency and page overhead. 

Rendering settings. All windows are rendered with a monospace font, line height 1.2, page mar-gin equal to 1% of page width, syntax highlighting enabled, and source newlines preserved exactly. Tabs are expanded to four spaces, the language is inferred from the filename when needed, and pages are cut only at source-line boundaries so wrapped lines are not split across pages. To keep rendered code usable in the agent setting, we additionally apply lightweight readability safeguards during ren-dering, preventing layouts that are nominally cheap but visually too small to inspect reliably. In our agent setting, we also keep line numbers aligned with the rendered code window so that references passed between tools, plans, and source windows remain faithful to the underlying repository lines. 

Discrete search space. The search space is ex-plicitly discrete: resolution, font size, and page count are all drawn from finite candidate sets. Hence the renderer only realizes a discrete family of layouts, so nearby nominal budgets may collapse to the same configuration. 

Token term. The token term matches the ren-dered cost to the nominal budget. Let bTimg (θ) de-note the renderer’s internal visual-cost proxy. Then 

Ltoken ∝ bTimg (θ)

B(x, r ) − 1 .

This term pulls the search toward configurations whose estimated image-token cost is close to the target implied by r.

Layout term. The layout term penalizes unread-able or inefficient code layouts. Define the fill ratio 

ϕ(x, θ ) = occupied area available text area .

Then Llayout decreases as ϕ(x, θ ) approaches a readable operating range. This matters because code is visually sparse: indentation, blank lines, short lines, and line-preserving pagination all limit how densely the page can be packed. As a result, increasing r does not translate into proportional savings. 

Page term and realized cost. The page term penalizes excessive fragmentation, favoring fewer pages and discouraging high-page-count configura-tions under small budgets. Even after a configura-tion is selected, the realized API-side cost 

Tapi (R) = c0 +

> p

X

> j=1

Timg (Ij )Window Text tokens Visual cost: tokens (pages) Lines Raw text r1 r2 r3 r5 r7 10 129.2 104.0 (1.00) 54.0 (1.00) 54.0 (1.00) 54.0 (1.00) 54.0 (1.00) 30 292.8 237.7 (1.60) 121.5 (1.00) 121.5 (1.00) 121.5 (1.00) 121.5 (1.00) 50 463.3 341.1 (3.13) 272.3 (2.73) 171.5 (2.70) 171.5 (2.70) 171.5 (2.70) 100 977.0 784.0 (4.13) 460.0 (4.40) 358.9 (4.87) 158.2 (4.97) 158.2 (4.97) 200 1724.0 1477.3 (3.50) 906.8 (6.63) 596.4 (6.40) 276.5 (9.70) 276.5 (9.70) 300 2819.7 2385.1 (3.50) 1558.6 (5.63) 958.4 (8.70) 417.1 (11.10) 389.0 (13.43) 400 3613.9 2888.2 (5.97) 1916.4 (5.10) 1297.8 (11.80) 607.4 (8.60) 512.7 (17.10) 500 4839.6 4360.8 (6.27) 2663.7 (7.47) 1853.3 (7.83) 781.6 (12.97) 708.2 (14.17) 

Table 4: Single-read rendering cost on SWE-bench Verified (Chowdhury et al., 2024) repository code. Each cell reports average prompt tokens, with the average number of rendered pages in parentheses. 

need not equal the nominal target B(x, r ): the search is performed under an internal proxy, the candidate set is discrete, and page count adds over-head. Therefore r should be read as a nominal renderer-side control variable rather than the real-ized prompt-cost ratio. 

B.2 Rendering Examples and Token Values Single-read rendering cost. Table 4 reports the standalone token cost of rendering SWE-bench Ver-ified repository code across different window sizes and nominal compression ratios. Each cell gives the average prompt tokens, with the average num-ber of rendered pages in parentheses. The table provides the raw values behind the cost-surface dis-cussion, showing that small windows quickly hit a visual cost floor, while larger windows obtain stronger but non-smooth and bounded savings. 

Illustrative examples. Listing 1 and Figure 7 show a typical text-to-visual conversion used in our experiments. The renderer converts the raw source excerpt into an image while preserving the original line structure and line-number alignment, clarifying the form of code-bearing observations seen by the agent under visual conditions. Figure 8 further illustrates a failure mode at higher visual compression ratios: increasing page density can make the rendered code noticeably harder to read, creating a practical readability trade-off beyond token cost. 

Listing 1: Raw-text source excerpt used for the render-ing example.                                            

> def normalize_patch ( patch : str ) -> set [ tuple [ str , str ]]:\ n """ Extract (file , added_line ) pairs from aunified diff , ignoring line numbers ."""\ n lines : set [ tuple [ str , str ]] =set () \n current_file =None \ nfor line in patch . splitlines () :\ n if line . startswith ("+++") :\ n current_file =line [4:]. strip () . lstrip (" b /") \n elif line . startswith ("+") and not line . startswith ("+++") :\ n if current_file and not current_file . startswith (" tests /") and not current_file . endswith (". txt ") :\ n lines . add (( current_file , line [1:]. strip () ))\n return lines

Figure 7: Rendered visual counterpart of the raw-text code excerpt in Listing 1. The renderer preserves the source layout and line-number alignment when convert-ing the code window into an image representation. 

Figure 8: Example readability failure under a higher visual compression ratio. Although the rendered page remains compact, dense layout and small text can make source code harder to inspect reliably. C Pipeline Details 

C.1 Localize and Package Operators 

The Localize operator is defined as 

L(x, q ) = Dloc (x, q, R(q; I), G ) ,

and the Package operator is defined as 

P(x, q ) = Dpkg (x, q, L(x, q ), I) .

Both operators are introduced in §4; this appendix provides the implementation details omitted from the main text. 

Inside Dloc . Given the retrieved symbol-chunk pairs R(q; I), Dloc runs three sub-procedures: • Issue-aware identifier resolution: extracts likely function, class, and module names from the issue text and matches them against Σ.• Traceback and file-line hint resolution: 

parses any traceback or explicit file/line refer-ence in the issue and resolves it to the enclos-ing symbol. • Graph expansion: expands over G by adding parent symbols, file-import neighbors, base classes, and direct callers/callees of each matched symbol. The resulting candidates are merged and ranked to produce the localization result returned by L(x, q ).

Inside Dpkg . Given L(x, q ), Dpkg selects candi-date files and optional focus symbols, then serial-izes a compact multi-view context from I:• File summaries: provide each selected file’s directory location and import-neighborhood summary. • Refined code windows: extract source win-dows around each focus symbol, sliced by line span and lightly trimmed. • Search hints: list identifiers and traceback anchors that the downstream agent may want to grep for. • Optional test pointers: list tests that import or reference selected symbols. The bundle is returned in a fixed JSON-like schema, so the PLB pre-localization pass and the LET loca-tor tool consume it through the same parser. 

C.2 Pre-Localized Bash Agent Details 

PLB consists of an offline pre-localization followed by a single-stage bash-first main agent. 

Offline pre-localization. For each instance we construct I and set the retrieval query to the issue text: 

q := x. 

We then retrieve R(x; I), the top-k symbol-chunk matches under BM25, and make two single-shot LLM calls. Let πloc , π pkg denote fixed prompt tem-plates and Eloc , Epkg denote structured JSON ex-traction operators. The first call produces a com-pact localization brief 

eL(x) = E loc 

  Mθ(πloc (x, R(x; I))) ,

and the second turns the same retrieved evidence together with eL(x) into the shared starting package 

ˆP(x) = E pkg 

  Mθ(πpkg (x, R(x; I), eL(x))) .

The package contains a compact starting brief with refined candidate files and symbols, a reproduction hint, search hints, optional test pointers, and short notes. It is computed once per instance and shared across all PLB conditions. 

Main agent interface. The downstream agent uses the tool set 

Tbash = {bash , submit }.

It is initialized with (x, ˆP) and runs a standard bash-first ReAct-style loop until submit .

Code observations. In PLB, bash is the only window onto repository source code. Under text conditions, code-bearing stdout is returned directly as text. Under visual conditions, when the issued command is recognized as a source-reading com-mand and its stdout is interpreted as a code window, that window is rendered with CodeOCR at com-pression ratio r. Typical source-reading commands include cat , sed -n , head , tail , and nl -ba com-bined with line slicing. Under wide conditions, the detected code window may be expanded before it is returned or rendered. Non-code stdout remains in text form. 

C.3 Locator–Editor Tool Agent Details 

LET decomposes the repair process into a locator phase and an editor phase. Locator interface. The locator operates with tool set 

Tloc = {localize_issue , pack_context ,

view_code , commit_plan }.

Localization tool. At trajectory step t, the agent synthesizes a short code-anchored query qt from the issue and its current hypothesis, and supplies it to the localization tool. The resulting operator is 

Lt(x) = Dloc 

 x, q t, R(qt; I), G ,

i.e., the same Localize procedure from Ap-pendix C.1 but driven by an online query rather than the static issue text. 

Packaging tool. Unlike localization, packaging is not driven by a free-form textual query. After inspecting Lt(x), the agent explicitly chooses a small set of candidate file paths and optional focus symbols. The operator is then 

Pt(x) = Dpkg 

 x, q t, Lt(x), I,

serialized as a compact multi-view structured context around the chosen candidates, including file/symbol context, refined code windows, and op-tional neighboring evidence. 

Direct code inspection. The locator may inspect code directly through view_code , which returns a raw source window specified by file path and line span. In visual conditions, locator-side code-bearing observations are rendered at compression ratio r; in text conditions they are returned as plain text. 

Committed plan and handoff. The locator phase ends when the agent calls commit_plan ,which emits a structured plan 

Π( x) =   target_files ,

target_symbols ,

reproduction_command ,

relevant_snippets ,

propagation_targets ,

notes ,

evidence_refs .

The locator transcript itself is dropped at the phase boundary. Only Π( x) and the source windows ref-erenced by evidence_refs cross over into the ed-itor’s initial context. 

Editor interface. The editor inherits the locator-side tools and adds shell access: 

Ted = {localize_issue , pack_context ,

view_code , bash , submit }.

Edits are applied through bash , and the agent may re-invoke localization or packaging if the locator’s plan turns out to be insufficient. 

Visual intervention boundary. In the current implementation, the visual rendering intervention is applied on the locator side only. The editor re-reads source in text form even under visual LET conditions. Thus LET evaluates whether visual code still provides marginal value once repository exploration has already been enriched by structured online tooling. 

D Reproducibility Details 

Backbones and API settings. All main experi-ments use two multimodal backbones: Kimi-K2.5 and Qwen3.5 (397B variant). For the online cod-ing agents, the model client uses temperature 0.0,maximum output length 4096 . The offline PLB pre-localization pass uses the same endpoint with temperature 0.0, maximum output length 1600 .

Task sampling and limits. The reported study focuses on Python repair tasks and uses a 100-instance stratified subset of SWE-bench Verified, the 500-instance human-validated subset designed to filter for clearer issue descriptions and problems resolvable from the provided repository context. The subset is sampled with a deterministic seed so that every Python repository present in SWE-bench Verified appears in our evaluation. The default global step limit is 250 . In LET, the online phase budgets are further split into a locator budget of 40 

steps and an editor budget of 120 steps. All condi-tions share the same official SWE-bench harness and evaluation rule. 

Condition families. Each backbone is evaluated under one text condition and four visual conditions indexed by r ∈ { 1, 3, 5, 7}. For PLB and LET we also distinguish normal and wide views. In the 

normal setting, a code-reading request returns only the source span selected by the tool. In the wide 

setting, the same request is expanded to include a larger surrounding window, so the agent receives more neighboring code before the observation is returned or rendered. E Trajectory-Level Failure Case Studies 

Because LET separates the locator and editor tra-jectories, we select three cases from LET runs to make these trajectory-level effects easier to inspect. We include three representative cases. The goal is not to showcase best-looking examples, but to isolate distinct failure modes at the trajectory level. 

E.1 Case 1: Correct Localization, Slow or Incomplete Editing Task. matplotlib__matplotlib-26342 

requires adding ContourSet.set_paths in 

lib/matplotlib/contour.py , with the corre-sponding contour tests as the gold verification target. 

Comparison. We compare two experimen-tal conditions, LET-normal-visual-r7 and 

LET-wide-visual-r7 . Both localize the same relevant files, contour.py and test_contour.py ,but diverge in the editor stage. The normal visual run fails with empty_patch despite 100% evidence coverage, whereas the wide visual run resolves the task with lower evidence coverage (57.1%) but a more focused patch-and-test loop. 

Trajectory behavior. In the failing run, the locator already inspects the correct code region: 

ContourSet.get_paths , nearby collection methods, and the target test file. The edi-tor then repeatedly re-reads local windows (view_code(contour.py, 1460–1480) ,

view_code(collections.py, 35–220) ,

view_code(contour.py, 930–1000) ) and issues grep-style checks, but never commits to a concrete patch or a real verification command. The run spends 121 editor steps and 2.75M editor tokens before terminating with no patch. In contrast, the successful run moves into a direct edit loop: after a small number of reads, it writes a temporary patch script, inserts set_paths() , runs a local smoke script, and then switches to focused 

pytest commands over test_contour.py .

Interpretation. This is the cleanest example of a trajectory where localization is already good enough, but the editor does not convert that sig-nal into a patch. The failure mode is hesitation and repeated local rereading, not repository miss. 

E.2 Case 2: Locator Miss, Editor Rescue via Bash Search Task. django__django-11299 requires modify-ing django/db/models/sql/query.py , specifi-cally the logic around Query._add_q , so that SQL generated for a CheckConstraint does not propa-gate incorrect aliasing behavior. 

Comparison. We compare the visual and text conditions in LET at r=1 . In the vi-sual run, the locator anchors the plan on 

django/db/models/constraints.py and gets zero gold coverage. The text run, by contrast, di-rectly surfaces query.py with full evidence and snippet coverage. Despite this locator miss, the visual run still resolves the task. 

Trajectory behavior. The rescue happens in the editor, not through another structured localization step. The editor falls back to bash-native search, using commands such as grep over query.py 

and django/db/models/ to find relevant terms including build_where , with_col_aliases , and 

simple_col . It then re-reads the target region with view_code , writes a temporary reproduc-tion script for the SQL generation bug, edits 

query.py , and verifies the patch with python tests/runtests.py constraints . This rescued visual run is much more expensive than the clean text-guided run, taking 62 editor steps and 1.20M editor tokens versus 21 steps and 0.28M. 

Interpretation. This case shows that editor res-cue is possible after a locator miss, but it is costly. The recovery comes from local bash search and rereading rather than from re-invoking the struc-tured locator, reinforcing that failures in repository understanding can be shifted downstream into a more expensive patch-search loop. 

E.3 Case 3: Correct Target, Incorrect Semantic Fix Task. pydata__xarray-6461 concerns 

xarray.where(..., keep_attrs=True) when the second argument is a scalar. The gold patch is in xarray/core/computation.py , but the fix requires preserving the intended keep_attrs 

semantics across scalar and variable inputs. 

Comparison. We compare the text and visual LET conditions, with the visual run at r=3 . Both localize the correct file with 100% evidence cover-age, but only the visual run resolves the task. Trajectory behavior. The unresolved text run reproduces the error with a local smoke command and then tests several nearby variants. It eventually patches keep_attrs = lambda attrs, context: attrs[1] as attrs[1] if len(attrs) > 1 else {} . This avoids the index error, but uses the wrong fallback semantics and fails the official test. The resolved visual run binds the target test earlier, re-reads the relevant where() implementation and test window, and converges to the stronger fallback 

attrs[1] if len(attrs) > 1 else attrs[0] if attrs else {} .

Interpretation. This case is not about finding the right file or function. Both runs reach the cor-rect target, but one fails to recover the API-level semantics needed for the patch. The bottleneck is therefore semantic repair inside the editor, not repository understanding. 

F Prompt Templates 

For reproducibility, we include the raw prompt tem-plates used by the released implementation rather than paraphrased summaries. The prompts are or-ganized as paired system and instance templates. In our implementation, the system template de-fines persistent behavioral constraints, tool bound-aries, and phase-specific responsibilities, while the 

instance template injects task-specific content such as the issue title, issue description, working directory, and locator-to-editor handoff context. We expose the core prompt templates for the three main agent roles in the paper: PLB, the LET locator, and the LET editor. These prompt pairs differ mainly in behavioral control rather than task content. The PLB prompt treats the pre-localized package as a starting hypothesis for a bash-native repair loop. The LET locator prompt forbids edit-ing and testing, and instead requires the model to commit a structured plan. The LET editor prompt starts from that committed plan and encourages fo-cused re-reading and repository-native verification before submission. The wide setting is not implemented uniformly across pipelines. In PLB, the difference be-tween normal and wide mainly comes from source-window expansion and rendering policy rather than from a distinct prompt template. In LET, how-ever, the wide locator condition uses a dedicated prompt pair that explicitly encourages broader code inspection before plan commitment. We there-fore include the LET wide-locator prompts below as the representative prompt-level intervention for broader repository exploration. The offline PLB pre-localization prompts are implemented directly in experiments/prepackage_runner.py , where the system instruction and JSON schema for the Localize/Package calls are constructed in code. 

PLB prompt pair. PLB keeps the agent in a bash-first repair loop. The system prompt defines the global workflow and boundaries, while the instance prompt injects the issue and the pre-localized pack-age as the agent’s starting context. 

LET locator prompt pair. The LET locator prompt pair isolates repository understanding from downstream editing. The system prompt fixes the locator role and its tool boundaries, while the in-stance prompt instructs the agent to browse, inspect, and finally commit a structured plan without edit-ing or testing. 

LET editor prompt pair. The LET editor prompt pair starts from the committed locator plan. The system prompt keeps the agent in an editor role with access to repository-native repair tools, while the instance prompt frames the locator plan as the first hypothesis and encourages focused verification before submission. 

LET wide-locator prompt pair. The LET wide setting is most visible at the locator stage. Unlike the standard locator prompt, the wide-locator vari-ant explicitly encourages broader code inspection before plan commitment, for example by prefer-ring larger source windows and more surrounding context when the likely edit region is still uncertain. This is the clearest prompt-level realization of the 

wide condition in our study, so we show both the system and instance templates below. Listing 2: PLB system prompt template. 

You are a single - stage repository coding agent . You have exactly two tools : 1. ` bash ( command ) `

Use bash for search , precise source reading , focused probes , edits , repo - native tests , and final `git diff / status `.2. ` submit () `

Submit exactly once after final diff inspection and at least one relevant repo - native test after the latest edit . General rules : - Work shell - first , similar to a mini - style coding agent . - A lightweight prepackage may be provided as an additional user message . Treat it as a prior , not a proof . - Verify code locations with bash before editing . - Prefer focused reads such as `sed -n `, `head `, `tail `, `cat < small file > `, or `nl -ba ... | sed -n `.- Do not `cat ` large files blindly . - Prefer one coordinated edit over many tiny rewrites . - Modify source files only . Do not edit tests , docs , release notes , or benchmark metadata . - Temporary scratch scripts are allowed for narrow semantic probes , but they do not replace a final repo - native test and must not be included in the submitted patch .- If a relevant test passes and `git diff ` only touches the intended source files , inspect final `git diff / status ` and submit instead of continuing to browse . - Do not repeat the same test command unless the code changed or you have a new hypothesis to check . Visual - condition note : - In visual runs , code - reading bash outputs may be returned as rendered images with short metadata . - Treat those images as the exact code block to reason over . Listing 3: PLB instance prompt template. 

< issue_title > {{ task_title }} </ issue_title > {% if task_description %} < issue_description > {{ task_description }} </ issue_description > {% endif %} < instructions > You are solving a repository issue in `{{ cwd }} `.Workflow : 1. Read the optional prepackage message if one is provided . 2. Use `bash ` to confirm the likely files and symbols . 3. Use `bash ` for exact source reading , focused edits , repo - native tests , and final 

`git diff / status `.4. Before the first edit , write a short plan listing the files / symbols you expect to touch . 5. Run at least one relevant repo - native real test after your latest edit . 6. Finish with ` submit () `.Boundaries : - Modify source files only . - Do not edit tests . - Do not edit docs or release notes . - Do not emulate submit with bash . - Keep source reads narrow unless a larger contiguous block is clearly justified . - The prepackage is only a starting hypothesis . If bash evidence disagrees , trust the repo . - Scratch scripts must stay temporary and must not be included in the patch . Verification guidance : - Django : ` python tests / runtests . py < module > ` from `/ testbed `

- sympy : `bin / test <path > `

- Otherwise use the repo - native runner ; ` python -m pytest <path > ` is a fallback when appropriate . In each response : - Briefly state what stage you are in . - Make at least one tool call . </ instructions > Listing 4: LET locator system prompt template. 

You are the LOCATOR phase of a two - phase repository coding agent . Your job : identify exactly what needs to change in the repo . You will not edit or test code yourself . When you are done , you call ` commit_plan (...) ` with astructured plan , and the editor phase takes over with a fresh message history seeded only by your plan . Your step budget is small : aim to call ` commit_plan (...) ` once you have enough code evidence to describe the edit site and the verification command . This is a browse - style workflow : use coarse search to find promising locations , then open precise details before committing the plan . Do not loop on broad query rewrites once you have concrete file or symbol anchors to inspect . Once the likely edit site , propagation targets , and verification command are clear , stop browsing and commit the plan . Available tools : 1. ` localize_issue ( issue , ...) `

Coarse repository search . Synthesize a short code - anchored query from 

`< issue_title > ` and `< issue_description > ` ( setting names , class names , function names ). Pass that query as `issue `. Avoid generic verbs and natural - language paraphrases . 2. ` pack_context ( file_paths =[...] , focus_symbols =[...]) `

Coarse browse / context packing . Use this when you want a compact view of likely files , related symbols , or structure before choosing exact lines . You may call it whenever a coarse context pack is more useful than another exact line window . 3. ` view_code ( file_path , start_line , end_line ) `

Fine - grained detail view . Use this to inspect exact current lines after coarse search . Prefer 100 -250 lines per call so you see surrounding context ( callers , related methods , type defs ). Visual mode renders the upper end efficiently (~7 visual tokens per source line ); text mode is more bandwidth - sensitive , stay near 100 -150. Hard cap is 400 lines per call -subdivide larger reads . Do not widen reads after the edit path is already clear ; the editor can work from the anchored regions you cite . 4. ` commit_plan ( target_files , target_symbols , reproduction_command , relevant_snippets , propagation_targets , notes ) `

Finalize . Call this exactly once when you are confident , and you should become confident quickly . If you have concrete file or symbol anchors , move to ` pack_context (...) ` and ` view_code (...) ` instead of continuing broad localization . Once the plan is specific enough for the editor to start , commit instead of gathering extra context . You do NOT have `bash `, you do NOT have edit tools , and you do NOT have 

`submit `. The editor phase will do the editing and run repo - native tests . Plan rules : - ` target_files `: every source file the editor will read or modify . - ` target_symbols `: qualified names (e.g. ` BaseConstraint . __init__ `) . - ` reproduction_command `: the editor 's final repo - native verification command . Prefer ` python tests / runtests . py < module > ` for Django , `bin / test <path > `

for sympy . Either form is recognized . - ` relevant_snippets `: the line ranges the editor must re - read before changing anything . The editor does not see your ` view_code ` history . - ` propagation_targets `: for each affected class or module , list the methods that must be touched together . [ Detailed generic Python state - propagation guidance is omitted here for readability .] - `notes `: short free - form description of the intended semantic change . General rules : - Keep reasoning short and action - oriented . - Do not paraphrase the issue . Use the exact code anchors . - Never call ` commit_plan ` more than once . - If a tool result is enough to write the plan , write the plan instead of calling another exploration tool . Listing 5: LET locator instance prompt template. 

< issue_title > {{ task_title }} </ issue_title > {% if task_description %} < issue_description > {{ task_description }} </ issue_description > {% endif %} < instructions > You are the LOCATOR phase of a two - phase agent solving a repository issue in 

`{{ cwd }} `. You will not edit or test code . Your output is a single call to 

` commit_plan (...) `.Step budget : aim to commit the plan once you have enough code evidence to describe the edit site , affected symbols , and a verification command . Use abrowse - style strategy , but choose the tool order yourself : - ` localize_issue (...) ` is coarse search . Use a short code - anchored query synthesized from `< issue_title > ` and `< issue_description > `. If the returned candidates miss the code path , refine the query with stronger file , format , class , function , or traceback anchors . - ` pack_context (...) ` is coarse browsing / context packing . Use it when a compact multi - file view or symbol outline is more useful than exact line reading . - ` view_code (...) ` is the fine - grained source view . Use it to inspect the relevant edit region with enough surrounding context , then stop widening the search once the repair target is clear and prepare ` commit_plan (...) `.You may use these three tools in any order and as many times as needed within the step budget . Once the detail evidence is enough , call ` commit_plan (...) `

exactly once . If the likely edit site and verification command are already clear , do not keep comparing extra candidates . Evidence handling : [ Detailed evidence - filtering are omitted here for readability .] Plan content : - ` target_files `: every source file the editor will read or modify . - ` target_symbols `: qualified names of every symbol that will change . - ` reproduction_command `: the editor 's final repo - native verification command (` python tests / runtests . py < module > ` or `bin / test <path > `) . - ` relevant_snippets `: pinned `( file , start_line , end_line ) ` regions the editor must re - read up front . - ` propagation_targets `: for each class or module that gains new state , enumerate the sibling methods that may need to be updated together -typically ` __init__ `, `__eq__ `, ` __repr__ `, ` deconstruct `, `clone `, and 

` super () ` call sites . Skip a method only when you can articulate why the new state must not appear there . - `notes `: short description of the intended semantic change . - ` evidence_refs `: the Evidence IDs for source windows the editor should see up front . Boundaries : - You have no `bash `, no edit tools , no `submit `. The editor will do all modification and verification . - Do not paraphrase the issue title or description before 

` localize_issue (...) `. Use the exact code anchors . - Do not commit the plan before at least one ` view_code ` confirmed an edit region . In each response : - Briefly state what stage you are in ( locating / packing / inspecting /committing ). - Make at least one tool call . </ instructions > Listing 6: LET editor system prompt template. 

You are the EDITOR phase of a two - phase repository coding agent . The locator phase has already produced a structured plan . Treat that plan as a strong starting point , not as an authority : execute it when it is coherent , but use the available repo - reading tools to check nearby code , tests , and call paths when the issue or the patch semantics require it . Available tools : 1. ` localize_issue ( issue , ...) `

Optional . Use when the locator plan looks incomplete , points at tests rather than source , or your edit / test results suggest another file or symbol is involved . 2. ` pack_context ( file_paths =[...] , focus_symbols =[...]) `

Optional . Use after ` localize_issue ` or when you need broader structured context for a small set of candidate files . 3. ` view_code ( file_path , start_line , end_line ) `

Use to read exact source lines before editing and to inspect nearby code after a change . Prefer 100 -250 lines per call so the edit window has enough surrounding context . Hard cap is 400 lines - subdivide larger reads . 4. ` bash ( command ) `

Use for code edits , repo - native tests , scratch validation scripts in 

`/ tmp `, and final `git diff / status `.5. ` submit () `

Call when the patch is ready . Recommended workflow : 1. Start from the locator plan . Re - read its relevant snippets with 

` view_code ` and decide whether the plan covers the semantic surface of the issue . 2. If the plan is narrow or inconsistent , spend a small amount of effort with 

` localize_issue `, ` pack_context `, ` view_code `, or bash search to inspect nearby source / tests before editing . 3. Edit with `bash `.4. Run the plan 's reproduction command when it is usable . If it is too narrow , missing , or inconsistent with the repo , choose a nearby repo - native test that exercises the same behavior . 5. Inspect `git diff `. If the diff and test evidence match the issue , submit ; otherwise iterate on the smallest missing code path . General guidance : - Prefer the plan 's files and commands when they make sense , but do not ignore evidence that the plan missed a related source path . - Keep extra localization lightweight . The goal is to recover the mini - style read / edit / test feedback loop without re - reading the whole repository . - Edit source files only . Do not edit tests , docs , or release notes . - Scratch scripts must live in `/ tmp ` and must not appear in the patch . - Use repo - native tests for final verification when practical , such as 

` python tests / runtests . py < module > ` for Django or `bin / test <path > ` for sympy . - Keep reasoning short and action - oriented . Listing 7: LET editor instance prompt template. 

< issue_title > {{ task_title }} </ issue_title > {% if task_description %} < issue_description > {{ task_description }} </ issue_description > {% endif %} < plan_from_locator > {{ plan_text }} </ plan_from_locator > < instructions > You are solving this repository issue in `{{ cwd }} `. The locator phase has given you a plan above . Use it as the first hypothesis and then complete the normal coding loop . Suggested flow : 1. If locator evidence is provided after this prompt , use it as your first source - code context . Do not call ` view_code (...) ` for a range already covered by locator evidence unless you need a narrower or stale - line check . 2. Re - read only missing or ambiguous snippets from the plan with 

` view_code (...) `.3. If the plan looks incomplete , validate it with lightweight repo reading : 

` localize_issue (...) `, ` pack_context (...) `, ` view_code (...) `, or bash search over nearby files / tests . 4. Edit source files with `bash `.5. Run a focused reproduction or repo - native test . The plan 's 

` reproduction_command ` is the default choice , but you may adjust to anearby test when the plan 's command is missing , stale , or too narrow . 6. Inspect `git diff ` and submit when the patch matches the issue . Keep the loop pragmatic : use the locator 's compression to avoid broad repo exploration , but do not submit a patch if the local evidence shows an adjacent code path still needs to be checked . </ instructions > Listing 8: LET wide-locator system prompt template. 

You are the LOCATOR phase of a two - phase repository coding agent . Your job : identify exactly what needs to change in the repo . You will not edit or test code yourself . When you are done , you call ` commit_plan (...) ` with astructured plan , and the editor phase takes over with a fresh message history seeded only by your plan . This condition studies wider repository reading before commitment . The primary goal is to inspect larger contiguous raw code blocks around plausible anchors , so the reading interface captures a full implementation region instead of tiny fragments . Broader multi - file browsing is only a soft aid : use it when it helps you pick the right anchor , then converge quickly . Available tools : 1. ` localize_issue ( issue , ...) `

Coarse repository search . Synthesize a short code - anchored query from 

`< issue_title > ` and `< issue_description > ` ( setting names , class names , function names ). Pass that query as `issue `. Avoid generic verbs and natural - language paraphrases . 2. ` pack_context ( file_paths =[...] , focus_symbols =[...]) `

Coarse browse / context packing . Use this when you want a compact view of likely files , related symbols , or structure before choosing exact lines . Prefer it when you need a light comparison across candidates before opening one large raw - code block . 3. ` view_code ( file_path , start_line , end_line ) `

Fine - grained detail view . In this condition , treat larger contiguous windows as the default : usually 180 -260 lines per call , centered on the anchor you care about . The system may auto - expand smaller requests in order to preserve one substantial raw - code block . Use this to read full methods , nearby helpers , adjacent branches , and the local implementation context . Avoid tiny 20 -50 line peeks unless you are confirming one last anchor before ` commit_plan `.4. ` commit_plan ( target_files , target_symbols , reproduction_command , relevant_snippets , propagation_targets , notes ) `

Finalize . Call this exactly once when you have enough evidence . If you have concrete file or symbol anchors , move to ` pack_context (...) ` and 

` view_code (...) ` instead of continuing broad localization . You do NOT have `bash `, you do NOT have edit tools , and you do NOT have 

`submit `. The editor phase will do the editing and run repo - native tests . Plan rules : - ` target_files `: every source file the editor will read or modify . - ` target_symbols `: qualified names (e.g. ` BaseConstraint . __init__ `) . - ` reproduction_command `: the editor 's final repo - native verification command . Prefer ` python tests / runtests . py < module > ` for Django , `bin / test <path > `

for sympy . Either form is recognized . - ` relevant_snippets `: the line ranges the editor must re - read before changing anything . The editor does not see your ` view_code ` history . - ` propagation_targets `: for each affected class or module , list the methods that must be touched together . When you add or alter a piece of object state , the methods that already reference the existing siblings of that state usually need to be updated in the same patch . - `notes `: short free - form description of the intended semantic change . General rules : - Keep reasoning short and action - oriented . - Do not paraphrase the issue . Use the exact code anchors . - Never call ` commit_plan ` more than once . - Prefer one or two substantial ` view_code (...) ` reads over many tiny peeks . - Broader browsing is useful only until you have a credible anchor . Do not keep browsing after the likely edit site and verification command are already clear . Listing 9: LET wide-locator instance prompt template. 

< issue_title > {{ task_title }} </ issue_title > {% if task_description %} < issue_description > {{ task_description }} </ issue_description > {% endif %} < instructions > You are the LOCATOR phase of a two - phase agent solving a repository issue in 

`{{ cwd }} `. You will not edit or test code . Your output is a single call to 

` commit_plan (...) `.This condition studies wider browsing before commitment , with the main emphasis on larger contiguous raw code blocks rather than many tiny reads . Tool use guidance : - ` localize_issue (...) ` is coarse search . Start with a short code - anchored query from `< issue_title > ` and `< issue_description > `.- ` pack_context (...) ` is coarse browsing / context packing . Use it when you want a compact comparison across files or symbols before opening one substantial raw - code block . - ` view_code (...) ` is the fine - grained detail view . Prefer larger contiguous windows , typically 180 -260 lines , so you see the whole local implementation block . The system may auto - expand smaller requests to preserve a single substantial read . Avoid repeated 20 -50 line peeks unless you are confirming one final anchor . Browse behavior : - Use broader multi - file or multi - symbol browsing only as a soft hinting step before committing to one anchor . - Let the tool choices reflect the repo structure ; once one strong path explains the issue , switch to a substantial ` view_code (...) ` read there . - Stop once the likely edit path is clear . Do not keep reading for its own sake . Evidence handling : - ` view_code (...) ` and ` pack_context (...) ` observations may include system generated Evidence IDs such as `E001 `.- Do not copy raw source code into the plan . Put the relevant IDs in 

` commit_plan . evidence_refs `.- Only cite IDs that appeared in tool observations ; never invent IDs . - The editor phase starts with a fresh message history . Include every region you actually want the editor to read up front , but do not select windows that you already believe are irrelevant . Plan content : - ` target_files `: every source file the editor will read or modify . - ` target_symbols `: qualified names of every symbol that will change . - ` reproduction_command `: the editor 's final repo - native verification command . - ` relevant_snippets `: pinned `( file , start_line , end_line ) ` regions the editor must re - read up front . - ` propagation_targets `: related methods that may need to be updated together . - `notes `: short description of the intended semantic change . - ` evidence_refs `: the Evidence IDs for source windows the editor should see . Boundaries : - You have no `bash `, no edit tools , no `submit `.- Do not commit the plan before at least one ` view_code ` confirmed an edit region . In each response : - Briefly state what stage you are in ( locating / packing / inspecting /committing ). - Make at least one tool call . </ instructions >