Title: Anchored Self-Play for Code Repair

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.03523v1

Published Time: Tue, 07 Jul 2026 02:26:40 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
# Anchored Self-Play for Code Repair 

Caroline Choi 1 Zeyneb Kaya 1 Shirley Wu 1 Tengyu Ma 1 Tatsunori Hashimoto 1 Ludwig Schmidt 1

## Abstract 

Code repair is an important capability for lan-guage models (LMs): given a buggy program and unit tests, an LM must produce a fixed program that passes the tests. Because code repair data is limited, we aim to scale supervision by using an LM to generate bug–fix tasks. We propose 

generator–fixer self-play , in which a single model is trained with reinforcement learning to gener-ate bugs and fix them. As the fixer improves, the generator adapts to produce more difficult bugs, yielding an automatic curriculum. To test whether this curriculum generalizes, we introduce BUG SOURCE BENCH , a repair benchmark span-ning realistic bug sources: bugs in human-written code, LM-generated code, and human-edited LM-generated code. On B UG SOURCE BENCH , we find that self-play drifts toward difficult but un-realistic bugs, improving on synthetic bugs but degrading on human-authored ones. We propose ANCHORED SELF -P LAY (ASP), which anchors self-play with a small reference set by adding a code-embedding similarity reward for genera-tion and mixing reference bugs into fixer training. Across bug sources, ASP achieves the best fix rates, improving average fix rate over standard self-play by +24% relative / +7 .0 pp absolute, with gains on bugs from both LMs and humans. 

## 1. Introduction 

Code repair is an important capability for language models (LMs) used in programming workflows (Xu et al., 2022; Jimenez et al., 2023). Given a buggy program and accom-panying unit tests, an LM must produce a fix that passes the tests. However, high-quality, real-world repair data is limited (Just et al., 2014; Widyasari et al., 2020; Le Goues 

> 1

Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Caroline Choi 

<cchoi1@stanford.edu >.

Proceedings of the 43 rd International Conference on Machine Learning , Seoul, South Korea. PMLR 306, 2026. Copyright 2026 by the author(s). 

et al., 2015; Madeiral et al., 2019; Oliva et al., 2025). We ask whether high-quality supervision for code repair can be scaled using LMs to generate bug–fix tasks for training, with unit tests providing automatic verification. We study an open-ended generation setting in which an LM can apply arbitrary text edits to correct code. This allows for more diverse and adaptive synthetic data. Ideally, as the fixer improves over training, the generator produces bugs that are increasingly challenging and realistic, forming an automatic curriculum. We instantiate this idea with generator–fixer self-play (Fig-ure 1). A single model is trained with reinforcement learning to alternate between generating a bug and fixing it. The gen-erator is rewarded for producing valid, appropriately diffi-cult bugs (tests fail), and the fixer is rewarded for producing correct repairs (tests pass). A key challenge in generator–fixer self-play is distribution drift. Unit tests verify functional behavior, but they do not verify realism: many edits can break tests, but few resemble bugs encountered in practice. As training progresses, the generator can drift toward difficult but unrealistic bugs, im-proving repair on self-generated tasks while degrading on real-world ones. Prior work mitigates this by constraining bug generation to repository histories, deletions, or mutation operators (Wei et al., 2025; Forrest et al., 2009; Allamanis et al., 2021). However, this limits the diversity and scale of synthetic training data and does not address the open-ended generation setting we consider here. To evaluate whether self-play improves code repair be-yond its own synthetic distribution, we introduce B UG -SOURCE BENCH , a benchmark for cross-source repair gener-alization. In LM-assisted programming, repair models may encounter bugs from multiple sources: human-written code, LM-generated code, and human edits to LM-generated code. BUG SOURCE BENCH therefore spans human-authored bugs, human edits of LM-generated bugs, and LM-generated bugs from weaker and stronger code models. Crucially, B UG -SOURCE BENCH holds the repair task fixed while varying only the bug source. On B UG SOURCE BENCH , we find that standard self-play exhibits distribution drift: it improves on LM-generated bugs but regresses on human-authored bugs. We propose 1       

> arXiv:2607.03523v1 [cs.SE] 3 Jul 2026 Anchored Self-Play for Code Repair
> Figure 1. Anchored self-play for code repair. Left: In generator–fixer self-play, the generator edits a correct program to produce a bug and the fixer repairs it; unit tests reward bug validity and repair correctness. Because unit tests verify pass/fail behavior but not realism, self-play can drift toward unrealistic test-failing bugs. Right: BUG SOURCE BENCH evaluates repair on the same programming tasks while varying the bug source, covering human-written bugs, human-edited LM bugs, and LM-generated bugs. A NCHORED SELF -P LAY
> (ASP) mitigates this drift by anchoring training to a small reference set, using an embedding-similarity reward for bug generation and reference-bug mixing for fixer training.

ANCHORED SELF -P LAY (ASP) (Figure 1), which anchors self-play to a small reference set sampled from the target bug sources. ASP uses this reference set in two complemen-tary ways: a code-embedding similarity reward guides the generator toward target-like bugs, and reference-bug mix-ing exposes the fixer to realistic bugs throughout training. Anchoring stabilizes self-play and improves cross-source repair: ASP achieves the best overall fix rate, improving average fix rate by 24% relative / +7 .0 pp absolute over standard self-play, with gains on both LM-generated bugs (100% relative / +11 pp absolute) and human-originated bugs ( 7.1% relative / +3 .4 pp absolute). Our contributions are: • We formulate generator–fixer self-play for code repair and identify distribution drift as a key failure mode of unit-test-only self-play. • We introduce and release B UG SOURCE BENCH , a con-trolled multi-source benchmark spanning human-written, human-edited LM, and LM-generated bugs. • We propose A NCHORED SELF -P LAY (ASP), which re-duces drift by combining embedding-similarity guidance for bug generation with reference-mixed fixer training. 

## 2. Problem Formulation 

We study code repair with unit-test feedback. Our goal is to train repair models using unit tests as the correctness signal, while evaluating whether the learned fixer generalizes across realistic sources of bugs. 

Code repair. Let x denote a programming task, consisting of natural-language instructions, input/output specifications, constraints, and a unit-test suite. Given a candidate program 

c, running the tests produces a binary verifier v(x, c ) ∈{0, 1}, where v(x, c ) = 1 if and only if c passes all tests for task x, together with test output o(x, c ), such as compilation errors, failed assertions, or stack traces. We define a valid bug for task x as an executable program b

that fails at least one test: 

v(x, b ) = 0 .

A repair model, or fixer , πF maps the task, buggy program, and test output to a distribution over candidate repairs: 

y ∼ πF (· | x, b, o (x, b )) .

A repair succeeds if the repaired program passes the unit tests, i.e., v(x, y ) = 1 . In our main experiments, the fixer outputs a full corrected program rather than a diff. 2Anchored Self-Play for Code Repair 

Evaluation across bug sources. In deployment, bugs may come from heterogeneous sources: human programmers, LM coding assistants, or human edits of LM-generated code. We therefore evaluate repair under a family of bug-source distributions. For each source s ∈ S , let Ps(· | x)

denote the distribution over valid bugs for task x. The repair performance of fixer πF on source s is 

Perf( πF ; s) = Ex∼D Eb∼Ps(·| x) Ey∼πF (·| x,b,o (x,b )) [v(x, y )] ,

where D is the evaluation distribution over tasks. In our benchmark, D is the uniform distribution over a fixed held-out task set, and different bug sources share the same under-lying tasks. We summarize cross-source performance by averaging over bug sources: 

Perf avg (πF ) = 1

|S| 

X

> s∈S

Perf( πF ; s).

This criterion evaluates whether a fixer improves broadly across realistic bug sources, rather than only on the dis-tribution induced by a particular bug generator. We next instantiate S with B UG SOURCE BENCH , a controlled bench-mark spanning multiple bug sources in LM-assisted pro-gramming. 

## 3. B UG SOURCE BENCH : Controlled Bug-Source Evaluation 

We introduce B UG SOURCE BENCH to evaluate whether code-repair methods generalize across realistic sources of bugs. The benchmark is designed to isolate bug-source shift: all sources share the same programming tasks, specifica-tions, and unit tests, and differ only in the buggy implemen-tation provided to the repair model. 

3.1. Benchmark Construction 

We build B UG SOURCE BENCH from BigCodeBench (Zhuo et al., 2024), a code-generation benchmark emphasizing realistic library and API usage. Each BigCodeBench task contains (i) natural-language programming instructions, (ii) unit tests that define correctness, and (iii) a reference im-plementation that passes those tests. We convert each task into a repair instance by preserving the original prompt and unit tests and replacing the reference implementation with a buggy program. 

Task structure. A B UG SOURCE BENCH example consists of programming instructions x, a buggy program b, and the accompanying unit-test verifier v(x, ·). All buggy programs in B UG SOURCE BENCH execute under the test harness and fail at least one unit test. At evaluation, the model receives 

(x, b ) and unit-test feedback o( x, b ) (e.g., failing tests and truncated error traces) and must output a corrected program 

y that passes all tests. 

Bug sources. BUG SOURCE BENCH contains four bug-source variants that reflect common sources of errors in LM-assisted programming. All variants are constructed on the same underlying tasks; only the buggy implementation differs. • HUMAN . Annotators introduce bugs into each task’s human-written reference solution. They are instructed to make 1–4 localized edits that preserve executability while causing at least one unit test to fail. We encour-age realistic developer mistakes, such as off-by-one errors, wrong constants, missing edge cases, or API misuse, rather than syntax-breaking edits. • HUMAN -E DITED LM. To model human-in-the-loop errors, we first prompt gpt-5-mini to solve the task and retain an incorrect program that executes but fails at least one unit test. Annotators then edit this draft while keeping it executable and incorrect. This source captures mistakes that can arise when developers mod-ify, integrate, or partially correct LM-generated code. • LM ERRORS (Q WEN -7B). We prompt 

Qwen2.5-Coder-7B-Instruct to solve each task, not to generate bugs, and retain incorrect programs that execute but fail at least one unit test. This source captures errors produced by a weaker code LM under standard code-generation prompting. • LM E RRORS (GPT -OSS -20 B). We apply the same procedure with gpt-oss-20b , yielding errors from a stronger code model. Together, these variants cover three realistic bug-source families: human-written bugs, human-edited LM bugs, and unedited LM-generated bugs. Because the task and tests are fixed across sources, B UG SOURCE BENCH directly mea-sures how repair performance changes with the origin of the bug. 

Repair interface. We evaluate repair models using a full-program repair interface with unit-test feedback. That is, the model receives the task description, buggy program, and truncated test output, and returns a complete corrected pro-gram. In Section A and Table 3, we compare this interface with full-program repair without test traces and diff-based patching. Test feedback improves repair performance, while diff-based repair often underperforms due to brittle format-ting and patch application. We therefore use the test-trace interface in all main experiments. 

Benchmark analyses. We provide per-source examples in Section A.1 and full construction details, including 3Anchored Self-Play for Code Repair 

filtering criteria and sampling budgets, in Section A.2. In Section A.4, we evaluate frontier models on B UG -SOURCE BENCH and show that repair is distinct from code generation: models often solve tasks from scratch that they fail to repair, and vice versa. We also analyze bug-source structure by categorizing bugs into coarse error types and by measuring kNN source purity using voyage-code-3 

embeddings. These analyses reveal systematic source-dependent failure patterns and strong within-source clus-tering. BUG SOURCE BENCH lets us test whether synthetic bug–fix training improves repair across realistic bug sources, rather than only on the distribution induced by a particular gener-ator. We next describe generator–fixer self-play and then introduce A NCHORED SELF -P LAY (ASP), which anchors self-play to a small reference set to reduce bug-source drift. 

## 4. Self-Play for Code Repair 

We now describe the training procedures used to scale code-repair supervision. We first introduce generator–fixer self-play, which uses unit-test outcomes as rewards. We then show that this unit-test-only objective can drift toward unre-alistic bug distributions, and introduce A NCHORED SELF -PLAY (ASP) to anchor self-play to reference bug sources. 

4.1. Generator–Fixer Self-Play 

For each training task, we assume access to the program-ming specification x, unit tests, and a correct reference implementation c⋆. We train a single policy πθ to play two roles: a generator G that edits correct programs into buggy ones, and a fixer F that repairs the resulting bugs (Figure 1). We denote the corresponding role-conditioned distributions by πG and πF .The generator samples a candidate buggy program 

b ∼ πG(· | x, c ⋆),

and we run the unit tests to obtain test output o(x, b ). We call b valid if it executes under the test harness and fails at least one unit test. Invalid bugs receive a penalty and are not used for fixer training. For valid bugs, the fixer samples one or more candidate repairs conditioned on the task, buggy program, and test output: 

y ∼ πF (· | x, b, o (x, b )) .

4.2. Correctness and Difficulty Rewards Fixer reward. The fixer is rewarded for producing repairs that pass the unit tests. For a candidate repair y, we use 

rF(x, b, y ) = v(x, y ),

where v(x, y ) = 1 if and only if y passes all tests for task x.

Generator reward. The generator should produce bugs that are valid, challenging, and still solvable by the current fixer. A single repair attempt gives a noisy estimate of difficulty, so we estimate the fix rate of a generated bug using K independent repair attempts. For a valid bug (x, b ),we sample 

y(1) , . . . , y (K) ∼ πF (· | x, b, o (x, b )) 

and define 

ρ(x, b ) = 1

K

> K

X

> k=1

v(x, y (k)).

Bugs with ρ(x, b ) = 1 are too easy, while bugs with 

ρ(x, b ) = 0 provide little useful training signal because the current fixer cannot repair them. We therefore reward valid bugs whose fix rate falls in an intermediate difficulty band: 

rG

> base

(x, b ) = 



−1, b is invalid ,

1, ρ(x, b ) ∈ [ρℓ, ρ h],

−α, ρ(x, b ) ∈ { 0, 1},

0, otherwise. 

4.3. Optimization 

We optimize the generator–fixer loop with GRPO. For each task x, we sample G = 4 candidate bugs bi ∼ πG(· | x, c ⋆).For each valid bug (x, b i), we sample K = 4 independent repair attempts 

y(1: K) 

> i

∼ πF (· | x, b i, o (x, b i)) 

and compute the empirical fix rate 

ρ(x, b i) = 1

K

> K

X

> k=1

v(x, y (k) 

> i

).

Let RG(x, b ) denote the generator reward and RF(x, b, y )

denote the fixer reward. In standard self-play, RF is the unit-test pass indicator and RG is the difficulty-shaped reward from Section 4.2. ASP modifies this objective by adding a reference-similarity term to RG and by mixing reference bugs into fixer training (Section 4.5). 

Generator update. For each task x, we compute group-normalized advantages over the G sampled bugs: 

ˆAG 

> i

= RG(x, b i) − μG(x)

σG(x) + ϵ ,μG(x), σ G(x) computed over i ∈ { 1, . . . , G }.

We then update πG(· | x, c ⋆) using the clipped GRPO ob-jective. 4Anchored Self-Play for Code Repair 

Fixer update. For each valid generated bug bi, we com-pute group-normalized advantages over the K repair at-tempts: 

ˆAF 

> i,k

= RF(x, b i, y (k) 

> i

) − μF(x, b i)

σF(x, b i) + ϵ ,μF(x, b i), σ F(x, b i) computed over k ∈ { 1, . . . , K }.

We update πF (· | x, b i, o (x, b i)) with the same clipped GRPO objective, computing the loss only on tokens gener-ated by the policy and masking prompt tokens. 

4.4. Distribution Drift Under Standard Self-Play 

The rewards above encourage bugs that are valid and ap-propriately difficult, but they do not encourage bugs to be realistic. Unit tests can identify whether a candidate bug changes program behavior, but they do not indicate whether the edit resembles a bug written by a human programmer or produced by an LM coding assistant. As a result, the generator can drift toward idiosyncratic test-failing edits that remain useful under the self-play reward but differ from realistic bug sources. Figure 2a shows that standard self-play produces the in-tended co-evolutionary dynamics: as the generator trains, its bugs become harder for a fixed fixer, and as the fixer trains, it improves on bugs from a fixed generator. However, Figure 2b shows that these gains do not reliably transfer to realistic bug sources. Performance improves early but later degrades, especially on human-originated bugs. This pattern is consistent with distribution drift: the fixer improves on the generator’s evolving synthetic distribution while losing robustness to target bug sources. We therefore modify the self-play objective to anchor generation and fixer training to reference bug distributions. 

4.5. Anchoring Self-Play to Reference Bug Sources 

ANCHORED SELF -P LAY (ASP) assumes access to a small reference set of valid bugs, Dref , drawn from the training tasks and disjoint from evaluation. The reference set pro-vides a weak realism signal for self-play. We use it in two complementary ways: (i) reference mixing , which exposes the fixer to reference-source bugs during training, and (ii) 

similarity-guided shaping , which nudges the generator to-ward reference-like edits. 4.5.1. R EFERENCE MIXING FOR FIXER TRAINING 

For a training task with an associated reference bug bref ∈Dref , we replace the generated bug with probability pmix 

and train the fixer on (x, b ref , o (x, b ref )) . On these mixed episodes, we update only the fixer. We do not update the generator because the reference bug was not sampled from 

πG; empirically, updating the generator on mixed episodes reduced performance (Table 10). 4.5.2. S IMILARITY -G UIDED GENERATOR SHAPING 

Reference mixing improves fixer training but does not di-rectly change the generator’s distribution. To guide genera-tion toward realistic bugs, we add an auxiliary reward based on similarity to the reference set. 

Edit embeddings. For each generated bug b, we com-pute the unified diff between the reference solution c⋆ and 

b. We embed this diff with a code embedding model, 

voyage-code-3 , and compute its average cosine sim-ilarity to the k nearest reference edit embeddings. We map the resulting score to [0 , 1] and denote it by sim 01 (b).

Centered similarity reward. The similarity reward should act as a shaping term: it should bias the genera-tor toward reference-like edits without overwhelming the unit-test reward. Because the absolute scale of embedding similarities can vary across batches and embedding mod-els, we subtract a running baseline. At training step t, we maintain 

Bt ← βB t−1 + (1 − β) Eb∼batch [sim 01 (b)] ,

and define 

δt(b) = sim 01 (b) − Bt.

Thus, δt(b) measures whether a generated bug is more or less reference-like than the generator’s current average out-put. For valid generated bugs, the final generator reward is 

rG(x, b ) = rG

> base

(x, b ) + λ clip( δt(b)) ,

where clip( ·) clips the shaping term to a fixed range. This centered reward is more stable than using an uncentered similarity score, since it is less sensitive to shifts in the abso-lute magnitude of embedding similarities. Hyperparameters are given in Section B.1. 

## 5. Experimental Setup 

Data and splits. We train on 900 BigCodeBench tasks (Zhuo et al., 2024). For evaluation, we use 127 held-out tasks that appear in every BUG SOURCE BENCH 

split. Thus, all bug sources share the same underly-ing tasks, specifications, and unit tests; only the buggy implementation differs. For validation and checkpoint selection, we use 81 additional tasks from all B UG -SOURCE BENCH splits, disjoint from both train and test. We report results on four bug sources: BUG -SOURCE BENCH -H UMAN , B UG SOURCE BENCH -H UMAN -EDITED LM, B UG SOURCE BENCH -Q WEN -7B, and B UG -SOURCE BENCH -GPT -OSS -20 B.5Anchored Self-Play for Code Repair                 

> (a) Co-evolution of standard self-play. With a fixed fixer checkpoint, fix rate declines over generator training, indicat-ing that the generator produces harder bugs. With a fixed generator checkpoint, fix rate increases as the fixer trains, indicating improved repair on generated bugs.
> (b) Standard self-play exhibits distribution drift. Fix rate improves early but later regresses, most strongly on human-originated bugs. This suggests overfitting to the generator’s shifting synthetic bug distribution.
> Figure 2. Self-play training dynamics and distribution drift.
> Figure 3. Fix rates across bug sources on B UG SOURCE BENCH .Standard self-play yields inconsistent gains across bug sources, consistent with distribution drift. ASP improves repair across every source and achieves the best overall fix rate, outperforming standard self-play by +7 .0pp / 24% relative. Gains hold for both LM-generated bugs ( +11 pp / 100% relative) and human-originated bugs ( +3 .4
> pp / 7.1% relative).

Reference pool. ASP uses a reference pool of 900 bugs sampled from the training splits of B UG SOURCE BENCH ,with equal representation from the four bug sources. This pool serves two purposes: it provides reference edit em-beddings for the generator’s similarity reward, and it sup-plies reference bugs for fixer training through reference mixing. For parity, the Fixer-Only baseline also mixes the same reference bugs into fixer training, but does not use the similarity-based generator reward. 

Initialization. Unless otherwise stated, both generator and fixer are initialized from 

Qwen2.5-Coder-7B-Instruct (Hui et al., 2024). The two roles share a single set of weights and are trained with GRPO. 

Comparisons. We compare ASP against three main base-lines: • Base Model: the pretrained model used directly as a fixer, without post-training. • Fixer-Only: a frozen base-model generator samples bugs, while only the fixer is trained with GRPO. Reference bugs are mixed into fixer batches for parity with ASP. • Self-Play: the generator and fixer are trained jointly with GRPO using the unit-test-only self-play objective. 

Training and evaluation protocol. For each training task, the generator samples candidate buggy programs. We retain programs that execute under the test harness and fail at least one unit test. The fixer receives the task description, buggy code, and truncated unit-test output, and is rewarded for producing a program that passes the tests. During training, the fixer samples up to K = 4 repairs per bug. At test time, we use a single repair attempt per bug and decode greedily with temperature 0.0. Full hyperparameters and prompts are provided in Section B; additional baselines are reported in Section E. 

## 6. Main Results 

Figure 3 compares ASP with standard self-play and fixer-only training on B UG SOURCE BENCH . ASP achieves the best fix rate on every bug source, improving average fix rate by 24% relative / +7 .0 pp absolute over standard self-play and by 29% relative / +8 .2 pp absolute over Fixer-Only. The largest gains are on LM-generated bugs: +145% relative / 

+12 .6 pp absolute on Q WEN -7B bugs, and +69% relative / +8 .7 pp absolute on GPT -OSS -20 B bugs. Anchoring also improves both Human and Human-Edited LM splits relative 6Anchored Self-Play for Code Repair 

Figure 4. Anchoring stabilizes self-play and improves cross-source repair. We plot fix rate versus training step for Fixer-Only, standard Self-Play, and ASP on held-out bugs from each B UG SOURCE BENCH source and their average. Standard self-play improves early but later degrades on realistic bug sources, especially Human and Human-Edited LM bugs. In contrast, ASP yields higher and more stable performance across sources. 

to standard self-play, with gains of +17 .5% relative / +5 .5

pp absolute on Human-Edited LM and +2 .0% relative / 

+1 .3 pp absolute on Human. Standard self-play improves the average fix rate over Fixer-Only by +1 .2 pp, but its gains are not consistent across sources: it improves some splits while degrading on Q WEN -7B bugs by −1.5 pp. In contrast, ASP improves all sources simultaneously. The Base Model and Fixer-Only have simi-lar average performance, but Fixer-Only shifts performance toward LM-generated bugs: it improves Q WEN -7B from 

7.1% to 10 .2% and GPT -OSS -20 B from 7.0% to 12 .6% ,while leaving Human performance essentially unchanged (30 .8% vs. 30 .7% ). These results show why evaluating only one bug source can be misleading: training can improve one source while failing to improve, or even hurting, another. We provide pass@ k results in Section D.1. We also show that ASP can improve larger 30B+-parameter code models when used as a test-time fixer in Section D.5. 

ASP produces more reference-like bugs. We use embedding-based diagnostics to verify that the similarity reward changes the generator’s bug distribution. As shown in Figure 9, the mean k-NN similarity between generated bugs and the reference pool increases under ASP, indicating that similarity shaping moves generations toward the target bug sources. We also stratify benchmark performance by generation-similarity quantiles and find that ASP outper-forms standard self-play within each bin. Thus, the gains are not explained solely by generating higher-similarity bugs; anchoring also improves the fixer’s robustness within com-parable similarity regimes. Additional analyses show that ASP improves consistently across semantic bug categories (Section D.4), and qualitative examples are provided in Fig-ure 8 and Section D. 

(a) Ablation of anchoring components. Reference mixing exposes the fixer to reference bugs during training, while similarity shaping adds an embedding-based reward that guides the generator toward reference-like edits. The full ASP method combines both and achieves the highest average fix rate across B UG SOURCE BENCH 

> splits.

Method Ref. Mix Sim. Reward Fix (%) 

Base Model 25.8 Self-Play 29.1 + Reference Bug Mixing ✓ 29.5 + Similarity Shaping ✓ 30.9 

ASP (Ours) ✓ ✓ 36.1 

(b) Effect of reference-pool composition. We vary which bug sources are included in the reference pool. Human-only references yield the strongest performance on Human bugs, while LM-only references shift improvements toward LM-originated bugs. The mixed reference pool used by ASP gives the best overall performance and the strongest gains on LM-generated sources, illustrating that the reference pool steers which bug patterns self-play emphasizes. 

Fix Rate (%) Ref. Pool Overall Human Hum.-Ed. Qwen GPT-OSS 

Human-only 34.4 67.5 37.8 11.8 11.0 LM-only 32.0 65.4 41.7 13.4 17.3 Self-Play 29.1 63.7 31.5 8.7 12.6 

ASP (Ours) 36.1 65.0 37.0 21.3 21.3 

## 7. Ablations 

7.1. Anchoring Components 

Table 1a ablates the two components of ASP: reference mixing for fixer training and the embedding-similarity re-ward for bug generation. Starting from standard self-play, each component alone improves average fix rate modestly. Combining them yields a substantially larger gain, suggest-ing that the two components address complementary fail-ure modes. The similarity reward steers the generator to-ward reference-like bugs, while reference mixing keeps the fixer exposed to realistic bugs as the generator’s distribution evolves. 

7.2. Reference-Pool Composition 

Table 1b varies the sources used to construct the reference pool. The choice of reference bugs affects which bug pat-terns self-play emphasizes. Human-only references give 7Anchored Self-Play for Code Repair    

> Figure 5. Reference set scaling. We vary the number of refer-ence bugs used for anchoring and report fix rates on each B UG -SOURCE BENCH split and their average. ASP improves with small reference sets and continues to benefit from larger pools, with the largest gains on LM-generated bug sources. Human and Human-Edited LM performance remain strong across reference-set sizes.

the highest fix rate on Human bugs, while LM-only ref-erences improve LM-originated bugs relative to standard self-play and give the highest score on Human-Edited LM. The mixed pool used by ASP achieves the best overall fix rate and the strongest performance on both LM-generated sources. These results suggest that the reference pool can steer anchoring toward particular deployment sources, while a diverse pool provides the best overall performance. 

7.3. Reference Set Size 

Figure 5 varies the number of reference bugs used for an-choring, sampled uniformly across Human, Human-Edited LM, Q WEN -7B, and GPT -OSS -20 B sources. ASP improves with as few as 50 reference examples, indicating that anchor-ing is sample-efficient. Performance continues to improve as the reference set grows, suggesting that larger pools provide broader coverage of realistic bug patterns. Additional robustness ablations in Section D and Section E show that ASP’s gains are robust across embedding mod-els and k-NN pooling parameters (Table 9), base models (Table 12), shared versus decoupled generator/fixer weights (Table 11), and task distributions (Table 13). 

## 8. Related Work 

Code repair and bug-source variation. Automated pro-gram repair is commonly evaluated on curated real-world bug datasets such as Defects4J, BugsInPy, ManyBugs, and Bears, as well as short unit-testable benchmarks such as QuixBugs (Just et al., 2014; Widyasari et al., 2020; Le Goues et al., 2015; Madeiral et al., 2019; Lin et al., 2017). Related code-generation benchmarks, including Hu-manEval, MBPP, APPS, EvalPlus, and LiveCodeBench, show that fluent model outputs often fail functional tests (Chen et al., 2021; Austin et al., 2021; Hendrycks et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2023; Jain et al., 2024), while repository-level benchmarks such as SWE-bench evaluate end-to-end issue resolution with realistic context and tooling (Jimenez et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2025a; Pham et al., 2025). Across these settings, performance is sensitive to the bug distribu-tion: human-written bugs, synthetic mutations, and errors in model-generated code induce different failure modes (He et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2022; Sonwane et al., 2025; Dou et al., 2025; Yang et al., 2025b). B UG SOURCE BENCH comple-ments prior benchmarks by holding the task, specification, and tests fixed while varying only the bug source, enabling controlled evaluation of cross-source generalization. 

Synthetic bug generation. Prior work scales repair super-vision by generating synthetic bugs, often under constraints that preserve realism. BugLab uses predefined mutation operators for self-supervised bug localization and repair (Al-lamanis et al., 2021; Forrest et al., 2009); repository-level systems use grounding from repository structure, tests, issue context, or patch provenance (Yang et al., 2025a; Pham et al., 2025; Wei et al., 2025; Ye et al., 2023; Zirak & Hemmati, 2024); and Break-it-Fix-it trains paired bug introducers and fixers using a critic such as a parser or compiler (Yasunaga & Liang, 2021; Long & Rinard, 2016; Chen et al., 2019). In contrast, we study open-ended bug generation, where the generator can apply arbitrary text edits and unit tests ver-ify failure but only weakly constrain realism. Our method adds a soft realism signal through embedding similarity to reference bugs while preserving open-ended generation. 

Self-play and curricula. Self-play has been used to gen-erate curricula by proposing tasks near a learner’s frontier and learning from rollouts (Bengio et al., 2009; Silver et al., 2017; Cheng et al., 2024; Kuba et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2025; Huang et al., 2025). In language and code domains, related work uses self-generated data for reasoning, theorem proving, adaptive testing, open-ended task design, and proposer–solver frameworks for synthesis, testing, or verification (Poesia et al., 2024; Dong & Ma, 2025; Chen et al., 2025; Liu et al., 2025; Yu et al., 2025; Ribeiro & Lundberg, 2022; Colas et al., 2022; Parker-Holder et al., 2023; Teodorescu et al., 2023; Pourcel et al., 2024; Lin et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2025; Wilf et al., 2025). We apply this curriculum perspective to code repair and iden-tify a failure mode of unit-test-only self-play: without an explicit realism signal, the generator can produce difficult test-failing edits that do not resemble realistic bugs. 

## 9. Discussion 

We study whether unit tests can scale code-repair su-pervision through open-ended synthetic data generation. Generator–fixer self-play creates an adaptive curriculum by 8Anchored Self-Play for Code Repair 

training a model to generate bugs that fail tests and repair bugs to pass them. However, we find that unit-test-only self-play can drift toward valid but unrealistic bugs, im-proving on its own generated distribution while weakening generalization to realistic bug sources. ANCHORED SELF -P LAY (ASP) mitigates this drift by anchoring self-play to a small reference set, using an embedding-similarity reward for bug generation and refer-ence mixing for fixer training. Using B UG SOURCE BENCH ,a controlled benchmark spanning human-written, human-edited LM, and LM-generated bugs, we show that ASP improves average repair over standard self-play and reduces bug-source drift. These results highlight the need for ex-plicit realism signals in unit-test-only self-play. Future work could explore stronger realism objectives, such as learned bug-style critics, preference-based rewards, or richer anchor-ing signals beyond code embeddings. 

Limitations. Our experiments focus on Python function-level repair with unit-test feedback. This controlled setting isolates bug-source shift, but does not capture repository-level challenges such as multi-file fault localization, de-pendency management, build-system interaction, or long-horizon tool use. Our realism signal also relies on a frozen code-embedding model and a finite reference pool; learned critics or human preference data may provide stronger sig-nals in future work. 

## Impact Statement 

This work aims to improve the reliability of language-model-based code repair. By studying generalization across bug sources, our results can help build automated programming tools that are more robust to realistic errors. As with other automated software-engineering systems, generated fixes should be validated before deployment. We do not antici-pate additional societal risks beyond those associated with broader use of machine learning in software engineering. 

## Software and Data 

Code is available at https://github.com/cchoi1/ anchored_self_play .

## Acknowledgements 

The authors thank Yangjun Ruan, Neil Band, Kaiyue Wen, Luke Bailey, Thomas Chen, and Arvind Mahankali for valu-able discussions and feedback on this work. We also thank the anonymous reviewers for their constructive feedback. This work made use of computational resources provided by the Stanford Marlowe team (Kapfer et al., 2025). CC was supported by the National Science Foundation Graduate Re-search Fellowship Program under Grant No. DGE-2146755. 9Anchored Self-Play for Code Repair 

## A. B UG SOURCE BENCH 

A.1. Examples 

BugSourceBench TaskID 1063 

Performs Principal Component Analysis (PCA) on the sum of rows of a 2D numpy array and plots the explained variance ratio. 

Note that: the title of the plot is set to ”Explained Variance Ratio of Principal Components”. The function assumes that ’arr’ is a valid 2D numpy array. Only the first principal component is considered in this analysis. The plot illustrates the proportion of the dataset’s variance that lies along the axis of this first principal component. 

The function should output with: ax (matplotlib.axes.Axes) – an Axes object from matplotlib. 

Human 

import numpy as np 

from matplotlib import pyplot as plt 

from sklearn.decomposition import PCA 

def task_func(arr): row_sums = arr. sum (axis=1) 

pca = PCA(n_components=10) 

pca.fit(row_sums.reshape(-1, 1)) 

# Plotting (requires matplotlib and sklearn) 

_, ax = plt.subplots() 

ax.bar([0], pca.explained_variance_ratio) 

ax.set_title("Explained Variance Ratio of Principal Components") ax.set_xticks([0]) ax.set_xticklabels(["PC1"]) 

return ax 

Human-Edited LM 

import numpy as np 

from matplotlib import pyplot as plt 

from sklearn.decomposition import PCA 

def task_func(arr): 

if arr.size == 0: 

raise ValueError("Input array is empty.") 

summed = np.sum(arr, axis=1) 

X = summed.reshape(-1, 1) pca = PCA(n_components=1) pca.fit(X) fig, ax = plt.subplots() 

ax.bar([1], pca.explained_variance_, color="tab:blue") 

ax.set_xticks([1]) ax.set_xticklabels(["PC1"]) ax.set_ylabel("Explained Variance Ratio") ax.set_title("Explained Variance Ratio of Principal Components") 

return ax 

LM Errors (Qwen-7B) 

import numpy as np 

from matplotlib import pyplot as plt 

from sklearn.decomposition import PCA 

def task_func(arr): 

# Ensure arr is a 2D numpy array 

if len (arr.shape) != 2: 

raise ValueError("Input must be a 2D numpy array") 

# Sum the rows of the array 

summed_data = np.sum(arr, axis=0) 

# Reshape the data to be 2D for PCA 

reshaped_data = summed_data.reshape(1, -1) 

# Perform PCA 

pca = PCA(n_components=1) pca.fit(reshaped_data) 

# Get the explained variance ratio 

explained_variance_ratio = pca.explained_variance_ratio_ 

# Create a plot 

fig, ax = plt.subplots() ax.bar( range (1), explained_variance_ratio, tick_label=[’PC1’]) ax.set_title(’Explained Variance Ratio of Principal Components’) 

return ax 

LM Errors (gpt-oss-20b) 

import numpy as np 

from matplotlib import pyplot as plt 

from sklearn.decomposition import PCA 

def task_func(arr): 

# Sum over rows to get column totals 

row_sums = arr.sum(axis=0) 

# Reshape to 2D array for PCA (n_samples=1, n_features=number of columns) 

X = row_sums.reshape(1, -1) 

# Perform PCA with a single component 

pca = PCA(n_components=1) pca.fit(X) 

# Extract explained variance ratio for the first component 

evr = pca.explained_variance_ratio_[0] 

# Plot the explained variance ratio 

fig, ax = plt.subplots() ax.bar([1], [evr], width=0.5, color=’skyblue’) ax.set_title("Explained Variance Ratio of Principal Components") ax.set_xlabel("Principal Component") ax.set_ylabel("Explained Variance Ratio") 

ax.set_xticks([1]) 

ax.set_ylim(0, 1) 

return ax 

Figure 6. BUG SOURCE BENCH example showing buggy programs from different sources for the same task x. The bug patterns differ qualitatively across sources. The human-written bug changes PCA parameters and plotting behavior; the human-edited LM bug uses explained variance rather than explained-variance ratio and changes the plotted index; Qwen-7B and gpt-oss-20b both make model-like errors involving the aggregation axis and PCA input shape. These examples illustrate why evaluating a single bug source can miss source-specific repair failures. 

A.2. Construction Overview. BUG SOURCE BENCH is built from 1,114 BigCodeBench-style programming tasks. Each task provides natural-language instructions, unit tests that define correctness, and a reference implementation that passes those tests. A BUG SOURCE BENCH instance pairs a task with a buggy program that executes under the test harness and fails at least one unit test. All B UG SOURCE BENCH variants share the same underlying tasks and differ only in how the buggy program is produced, enabling controlled comparisons across bug sources. 

Bug validity criteria. We first remove 26 BigCodeBench tasks whose reference solutions do not pass the provided unit tests, leaving 1,114 tasks for bug construction. We accept a candidate program as a valid bug if it executes under the test 10 Anchored Self-Play for Code Repair 

harness and fails at least one unit test. We reject candidates that fail due to interpreter or runtime errors identified by pattern matching over test output, such as SyntaxError , ImportError , or NameError . Assertion failures from the unit tests are treated as valid test failures. 

Task structure. All datasets are converted to a common B UG SOURCE BENCH schema. We store function bodies only, with 4-space indentation, for both buggy and canonical solution . Each example contains: • task id : identifier for the underlying task, shared across bug sources. • instruct prompt : natural-language problem statement, including input/output specifications and constraints. • buggy : buggy function body that executes but fails at least one unit test. • canonical solution : reference correct function body, used for dataset construction and evaluation but never provided to the fixer. • test : unit-test harness used to evaluate candidate repairs. • complete prompt : full prompt used in the default repair interface, including instructions, buggy code, and test feedback. • code prompt : code-only prompt segment containing the function context. • entry point : function name called by the test harness. • doc struct : structured metadata extracted from the problem statement, when available. • libs : libraries or modules required by the task. • test output : truncated feedback from running buggy on test , used for analysis and as repair context. This schema lets us swap bug sources while holding the task, specification, and tests fixed. 

Bug sources. We construct four bug-source variants, each providing a different buggy program for the same underlying BigCodeBench tasks. For fair comparison, we retain only task IDs that appear in all variants. • BUG SOURCE BENCH -H UMAN . Starting from each task’s reference solution, two annotators introduce 1–4 localized edits that preserve executability while causing at least one unit test to fail. • BUG SOURCE BENCH -H UMAN -E DITED LM. For each task, we prompt gpt-5-mini to solve the original Big-CodeBench problem, without asking it to generate a bug. We resample up to 16 times until obtaining an executable but incorrect program. Annotators then edit this draft, for example by changing indices, conditions, or initializations, while keeping it executable and incorrect. Tasks for which no executable failing draft is found within the sampling budget are removed. • BUG SOURCE BENCH -Q WEN -7B. We prompt Qwen2.5-Coder-7B-Instruct to solve each task and retain one sampled program that executes but fails at least one unit test, resampling up to 16 times. • BUG SOURCE BENCH -GPT -OSS -20 B. We apply the same procedure with gpt-oss-20b , yielding errors from a stronger code model. 

Task alignment and splits. To ensure controlled evaluation, we compute the intersection of task IDs across all bug-source variants separately for each split. We provide a large test split, test all , with 517 examples per source ( 2068 total instances), and a smaller test split with 127 examples per source ( 508 total instances). The main experiments use the smaller test split. We also construct training splits by taking task IDs outside test and test all and intersecting them with BigCodeBench-train to avoid leakage. These training splits are used to form the reference pools for A NCHORED 

SELF -P LAY (ASP). 

A.3. Bug Source Analyses 

We characterize bugs along two axes: semantic bug type and embedding-space source structure. For semantic type, we use five coarse categories: L OGIC ERROR , where the algorithm or reasoning is incorrect; W RONG VALUE , where an identifier, literal, constant, return value, or boundary condition is wrong; M ISSING EDGE CASE , where special cases or validations are missing or mishandled; API M ISUSE , where a library or framework API is used incorrectly; and O THER , for errors not captured by the previous categories. We label each buggy program with GPT-4o conditioned on the task specification, reference solution, buggy code, and unit-test traces. Figure 7 reports the resulting type distribution and an embedding-based source-clustering analysis. 11 Anchored Self-Play for Code Repair 

(a) Bug-type profiles by source. (b) k-NN source clustering in embedding space. 

Figure 7. Characterizing bug sources. We label each buggy program with a coarse semantic category using GPT-4o and report the distribution for each B UG SOURCE BENCH split. Bug types vary systematically by source: human-edited bugs skew toward logic errors, gpt-oss-20b bugs toward edge-case and constraint violations, and Qwen-7B bugs toward type and API mistakes. We also embed each reference-to-bug diff with voyage-code-3 and compute the fraction of its k nearest neighbors, excluding same-task neighbors, that come from each source. Diagonal dominance indicates that bugs cluster by source in embedding space. 

Table 2. Test failure rates by bug source. We report the mean fraction of unit tests failed by each bug and the percentage of bugs that fail all tests. 

Source Mean Fail Rate 100% Fail 

Human 66.2% 31.5% Human-Edited LM 54.2% 17.3% LM Errors (Qwen-7B) 64.5% 29.1% LM Errors (gpt-oss-20b) 53.5% 20.5% 

Failure-rate analysis. Table 2 reports how often bugs from each source fail the unit tests. H UMAN bugs have the highest mean failure rate and the largest fraction of bugs that fail all tests. H UMAN -E DITED LM bugs are more subtle on average, often passing a larger fraction of the test suite. 

A.4. Evaluation of Frontier Models on B UG SOURCE BENCH 

Table 3 reports fix rates for frontier models across bug sources and repair interfaces. 

Table 3. Repair interface comparison. Fix rate (%) across B UG SOURCE BENCH bug sources for R EPAIR (full repair), +T ESTS (repair with unit-test traces), and D IFF (patch output). C ODEGEN is accuracy on the original code-generation tasks. 

Codegen Human Human-Edited LM LM (Qwen-7B) LM (gpt-oss-20b) Model Score Repair +Tests Diff Repair +Tests Diff Repair +Tests Diff Repair +Tests Diff 

GPT-5.2 46.5 67.7 67.7 62.2 36.2 53.5 32.3 19.7 44.9 18.1 17.3 50.4 18.9 

o4-mini 48.0 66.1 70.9 55.1 37.8 56.7 31.5 18.9 44.9 9.4 15.0 49.6 9.4 

Sonnet 48.0 76.4 81.1 72.4 39.4 51.2 35.4 15.7 44.9 14.2 13.4 44.9 14.2 

Bug-source shift affects repair performance. Fix rates vary substantially across bug sources. Bugs from incorrect model-generated solutions, especially Qwen-7B and gpt-oss-20b, are consistently harder to repair than human-written or human-edited LM bugs. This supports the need for controlled cross-source evaluation: conclusions from one bug source may not transfer to another. 

A.5. Ablation of Repair Interfaces for B UG SOURCE BENCH 

We compare four interfaces: 12 Anchored Self-Play for Code Repair 

• Code generation: generate a complete solution from the task description. • Full repair: generate a corrected program given the buggy code. • Diff repair: output a patch to modify the buggy code. • Repair with test traces: generate a corrected program given the buggy code and unit-test error traces. Results are shown in Table 3. Test traces improve repair performance, while diff repair often underperforms due to brittle formatting and patch application. For diff repair, we use a custom patch applier with fuzzy context matching. We use repair with test traces as the default interface in the main experiments because it performs well and matches common test-driven debugging workflows. 

Debugging is distinct from code generation. Solving a task from scratch and repairing an existing solution succeed on different instances. Table 4 reports the fraction of examples where one interface succeeds and the other fails. For example, on B UG SOURCE BENCH -H UMAN -E DITED LM, Sonnet solves 41 .0% of tasks from scratch that it fails to repair, while repairing 43 .9% of tasks that it fails to solve from scratch. Similar patterns hold across models and bug sources, suggesting that repair requires capabilities, such as fault localization, that are not captured by end-to-end code generation alone.                                                

> Table 4. Repair and code-generation disagreement rates. Entries report the percentage of examples where one interface succeeds and the other fails.
> Human Human-Edited LM Outcome o4-mini GPT-5.2 Sonnet o4-mini GPT-5.2 Sonnet
> Fix Fail |Code Pass 16.4 16.9 8.2 27.9 27.1 41.0 Fix Pass |Code Fail 59.1 54.4 71.2 42.4 36.8 43.9
> LM Errors (Qwen-7B) LM Errors (gpt-oss-20b) o4-mini GPT-5.2 Sonnet o4-mini GPT-5.2 Sonnet
> Fix Fail |Code Pass 42.6 39.0 41.0 41.0 28.8 39.3 Fix Pass |Code Fail 33.3 30.9 31.8 40.9 32.4 30.3

## B. Training Details 

B.1. A NCHORED SELF -P LAY (ASP) and Self-Play Hyperparameters 

We train a Qwen2.5-Coder-7B-Instruct policy with GRPO using the following settings. • Optimization and regularization. Learning rate 1 × 10 −6. PPO-style clipping with ratio 0.28 .• Batching. Training batch size 64 . Validation batch size 256 . PPO minibatch size 32 . Dynamic batch sizing enabled. Maximum PPO token budget of 30 ,000 tokens per GPU. • Sequence lengths. Maximum prompt length 8192 tokens. Maximum response length 2048 tokens. • Rollouts. Asynchronous rollouts. Sampling temperature 0.6 for training and validation. Top-p 0.95 for validation. Samples per prompt: n = 4 for training and n = 1 for validation. • Systems settings. Gradient checkpointing enabled. • Training schedule and logging. 10 epochs total. • Parallelism and hardware. One node with 8 GPUs. Tensor parallel size 1 and sequence parallel size 1.

Self-play loop. For each task, we sample G = 4 candidate bugs. For each bug, we sample K = 4 independent repair attempts and estimate its solve rate ρ. The generator receives a band-shaped difficulty reward with ρℓ = 0 .25 , ρh = 0 .75 ,invalid-bug reward −1.0, and extreme-case penalty α = 0 .2. The fixer receives failing test output as context. Generator and fixer advantages are normalized separately. 

Anchoring. For A NCHORED SELF -P LAY (ASP), the reference pool contains bugs from all four B UG SOURCE BENCH 

sources: H UMAN , H UMAN -E DITED LM, Q WEN -7B, and GPT -OSS -20 B. We use voyage-code-3 to embed diffs between the reference solution and buggy program. The generator similarity reward uses k-NN scoring with k = 5 , margin scoring with temperature 5.0, reward weight λ = 0 .20 , and an exponential-moving-average baseline with decay β = 0 .99 .For reference mixing, 20% of fixer-training samples are drawn from the reference pool. 13 Anchored Self-Play for Code Repair 

B.2. Fixer-Only Hyperparameters 

We train a Qwen2.5-Coder-7B-Instruct fixer with GRPO while keeping the generator frozen. To approximately match compute with Self-Play and ASP, we use n = 16 actor rollouts per training prompt; validation uses n = 1 .

Data and prompting. Fixer-Only is trained on a mixture of BigCodeBench tasks and the same reference bug-source training splits available to ASP. During repair, the fixer receives failed unit-test output when available. At validation time, we evaluate both repair and standard code generation. • Optimization and regularization. Learning rate 1 × 10 −6. PPO-style clipping with ratio 0.28 .• Batching. Training batch size 64 . Validation batch size 256 . PPO minibatch size 32 . Dynamic batch sizing enabled. Maximum PPO token budget of 24 ,000 tokens per GPU. • Sequence lengths. Maximum prompt length 8192 tokens. Maximum response length 2048 tokens. • Rollouts. Asynchronous rollouts. Sampling temperature 0.6 for training and validation. Top-p 0.95 for both the frozen generator and validation sampling. Samples per prompt: n = 16 for training and n = 1 for validation. • Frozen generator configuration. Generator model: Qwen2.5-Coder-7B-Instruct. Generation temperature 0.6 and top-p

0.95 .• Training schedule and logging. 10 epochs total. • Parallelism and hardware. One node with 8 GPUs. Tensor parallel size 1 and sequence parallel size 1.

Compute. All runs use one node with 8 H100 GPUs and take approximately 48 hours for 120 training steps. 

## C. Prompts 

We use two role-specific prompts: a bug generator prompt that injects faults into a correct reference solution, and a bug fixer 

prompt that repairs a buggy program using unit-test feedback when available. We report the prompts verbatim. Placeholders such as <PROBLEM> , <CORRECT CODE> , <BUGGY CODE> , and <FAILED TEST OUTPUT> are filled at runtime. 

Bug generator prompt                                                                                                                

> 1You are a *bug generator* for Python solutions to competitive programming problems.
> 23You will be given:
> 451. Aproblem description.
> 62. A *correct* reference implementation in Python.
> 78Your task:
> 910 -Introduce **one or afew subtle bugs** into the code.
> 11 -The resulting code **must still be syntactically valid Python**.
> 12 -It should change the behavior so that **at least one unit test fails**.
> 13 -Do **not** drastically rewrite the code; keep the overall structure similar.
> 14 -Do **not** change the function signature, imports, or I/O format.
> 15 -Output **only** the full buggy Python code inside asingle ‘‘‘python‘‘‘ block.
> 16 17 Problem:
> 18 <PROBLEM>
> 19 20 Correct reference implementation:
> 21 <CORRECT_CODE>
> 22 23 Now generate the buggy version of this code. Return the entire function with the buggy code inside a‘‘‘python‘‘‘ block:

14 Anchored Self-Play for Code Repair 

Bug fixer prompt  

> 1

You are an expert Python debugging assistant.  

> 23

You will be given:  

> 45

1. A problem description.  

> 6

2. A buggy Python implementation that may fail some hidden unit tests.  

> 7

3. (Optional) Failed unit test output from running the buggy implementation.  

> 89

Your task:  

> 10 11

- Carefully read the code and identify the bug(s).  

> 12

- Produce a fixed version of the code that makes all unit tests pass.  

> 13

- Preserve the original function signature, imports, and I/O format.  

> 14

- Keep the solution reasonably close to the given implementation.  

> 15

- Output **only** the full corrected Python code inside a single ‘‘‘python‘‘‘ block.  

> 16 17

Problem:  

> 18

<PROBLEM>  

> 19 20

Buggy implementation:  

> 21

<BUGGY_CODE>  

> 22 23

Failed unit test output (if available):  

> 24

‘‘‘text  

> 25

<FAILED_TEST_OUTPUT>  

> 26

‘‘‘  

> 27

Now fix the bugs in this code. Return the entire function with the fixed code inside a ‘‘‘python‘‘‘ block: 

## D. Additional Evaluations 

D.1. Pass@k Results 

We report pass@ k under temperature sampling in Table 5, averaging over all B UG SOURCE BENCH sources. ASP outperforms all baselines at each sampling budget, and the gap increases at larger k.

Table 5. Pass@ k on B UG SOURCE BENCH . Results are averaged across bug sources. 

Method pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 

Base Model 25.8 37.3 43.8 Fixer-Only 27.9 40.4 46.2 Self-Play 29.1 41.5 48.3 

ASP (Ours) 36.1 50.7 57.2 

D.2. Qualitative Examples of Generated Bugs 

Figure 8 compares bugs generated before and after training with ASP. 

D.3. Similarity of Generated Bugs Mean similarity over training. For each generator checkpoint, we sample synthetic bugs on held-out B UG SOURCE BENCH 

tasks. We embed each reference-to-bug diff and compute its mean top-k cosine similarity to a target bug pool, excluding same-task matches when available. Averaging this score across generated bugs gives a similarity trajectory that measures how the generator distribution moves relative to the target source over training. 15 Anchored Self-Play for Code Repair BugSourceBench TaskID 953 

Generates random data points to plot bar charts for each in a given list of plot names, then saves them in a specified directory. This function takes a list of plot names, for each generating 10 random data points in [0, 1) to create a bar chart, then saves the bar charts as .png files in the specified directory, creating the directory if it does not exist. 

>> task func([’First Plot’, ’Second Plot’], ’./another folder/’) [’First Plot.png’, ’Second Plot.png’] 

Note that: This function deduplicates mystrings while maintaining its original order. Random data points for bar charts are generated in the range [0, 1). Each bar chart contains 10 data points. 

The function should raise the exception for: FileNotFoundError : If the provided directory path does not exist and cannot be created. 

The function should output with: list: Names of the files where the plots are saved. Each file corresponds to a title from mystrings .

BASE                         

> import numpy as np
> import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
> import os
> def task_func(mystrings, folder_path, seed=None):
> if seed is not None: np.random.seed(seed) saved_plots = [] processed_names = set ()
> if not os.path.exists(folder_path):
> os.mkdir(folder_path) for name in mystrings:
> if name in processed_names:
> continue
> data =np.random.rand(10) plt.bar( range (len (data)), data)
> plt.title(name) file_name = name.replace(" ", "_") + ".png" plt.savefig(os.path.join(folder_path, file_name)) saved_plots.append(file_name) processed_names.add(name)
> return saved_plots

ASP                                      

> import numpy as np
> import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
> import os
> def task_func(mystrings, folder_path, seed=None):
> if seed is not None: np.random.seed(seed) saved_plots =[]
> if not os.path.exists(folder_path):
> raise Exception("Directory could not be created.") for name in mystrings:
> data =np.random.rand(10)
> plt.bar( range (len (data)), data) plt.title(name)
> file_name =name.replace(" ", "_") +".png" plt.savefig(os.path.join(folder_path, file_name)) saved_plots.append(file_name)
> return ["error"]

Figure 8. BUG SOURCE BENCH example comparing bugs generated by the base model and by the ASP-trained generator. The base generator produces a simple synthetic error, while the ASP-trained generator introduces more semantic failures, including missing de-duplication, improper error handling, and an incorrect return value. 

Fix rate by generation-similarity quantile. To test whether downstream gains are explained only by producing more target-like bugs, we bin tasks by the generator’s similarity to the target pool using shared quantile boundaries across methods. Within each bin, we evaluate fixer performance on the corresponding held-out B UG SOURCE BENCH instances. This matched-similarity diagnostic compares ASP and Self-Play at comparable levels of generator-target similarity, allowing us to test whether ASP improves robustness beyond shifting the generator toward higher-similarity bugs. 

D.4. Evaluation by Semantic Bug Type 

We group bugs by semantic type and report fix rates in Table 6. ASP improves most categories, suggesting that its gains are not limited to a single error pattern. 

Table 6. Fix rate (%) by semantic bug type. Fix rates are reported in percent. 

Model Logic Wrong Val. Edge Case API Misuse Other 

Qwen-7B (base) 14 37 5 20 33 Fixer-Only 12 37 5 14 28 Self-Play 16 37 9 18 44 

ASP (Ours) 21 36 12 29 38 

D.5. Evaluation as a Test-Time Fixer 

We evaluate whether ASP-trained fixers can improve larger code-generation models at test time. We use DeepSeek-Coder-33B and Qwen2.5-Coder-32B as initial coders, generate candidate solutions, and then apply 7B fixer models for r repair rounds. Table 7 reports pass rates with k samples. ASP generally outperforms the base, Fixer-Only, and Self-Play fixers, and can improve over self-repair by the larger coder. 16 Anchored Self-Play for Code Repair 

(a) Similarity-guided shaping increases target-likeness of gener-ated bugs. 

(b) Performance on test tasks by generated similarity. 

Figure 9. We sample n = 3 bugs from the generator for each held-out B UG SOURCE BENCH task and compute the k-NN embedding similarity of generated bugs to target-source bugs. Similarity-guided shaping in ASP increases target similarity over training relative to standard self-play (left). We then bin tasks by generated-bug similarity, sample k = 3 repair attempts per task, and report fix rate with 95% confidence intervals (right). 

Table 7. Test-time fixer results. Pass rate (%) using large coders with fixer models over r repair rounds and k samples. The No repair 

row is the coder alone ( r=0 ); all other rows apply the listed fixer. 

r=1 r=2 

Fixer k=1 k=2 k=1 k=2 

Coder: DeepSeek-33B No repair: k=1 : 29.5 k=2 : 37.0 

Qwen-7B (base) 35.4 40.9 36.2 47.2 Fixer-Only 34.6 41.7 35.4 41.7 Self-Repair (Qwen-32B) 34.6 42.5 37.8 49.6 Self-Play 35.4 42.5 37.8 46.5 

ASP (Ours) 36.2 45.7 43.3 53.5 

Coder: Qwen-32B No repair: k=1 : 30.3 k=2 : 37.0 

Qwen-7B (base) 33.1 40.9 36.2 44.1 Fixer-Only 33.9 40.2 37.0 43.3 Self-Repair (DeepSeek-33B) 35.4 40.9 44.9 57.5 

Self-Play 33.9 43.3 37.8 48.0 

ASP (Ours) 38.6 44.1 44.9 54.3 

17 Anchored Self-Play for Code Repair 

## E. Additional Experiments 

E.1. Additional Baselines 

We compare against additional baselines that test alternative ways of improving repair. 

RL for code generation. To test whether improvements come from better general code-generation ability rather than repair-specific training, we train the base model to generate solutions from task specifications using binary unit-test rewards. We use the same task splits and comparable training settings as in the repair experiments. 

Self-play with constrained bug generation. As an alternative to open-ended bug generation, we evaluate a constrained generator based on AST mutations. We identify valid mutation sites in the reference implementation and ask the generator to select mutations that preserve syntactic validity while producing failing programs. We then train with the same self-play procedure. 

Supervised fine-tuning for repair. We train a fixer with supervised fine-tuning on B UG SOURCE BENCH training instances from all four sources, using a masked cross-entropy loss on the reference correct solutions. 

Alternate embeddings for ASP. To test sensitivity to the embedding model, we run ASP with CodeBERT embeddings instead of voyage-code-3 .                                 

> Table 8. Additional baselines. For B UG SOURCE BENCH splits, we report repair fix rate (%). For C ODEGEN , we report pass rate on the original code-generation task.
> Method Codegen Human Human-Ed. LM (Qwen-7B) LM (gpt-oss-20b)
> Base Model 21.7 58.3 30.8 7.1 7.0 Codegen RL 31.8 55.8 30.8 2.9 6.3 AST-Constrained Self-Play –59.8 26.8 3.9 3.1 Fixer SFT –46.5 18.1 10.2 11.0 ASP ( CodeBERT )–63.3 33.9 23.6 24.6

Results in Table 8 show that RL post-training for code generation improves code-generation pass rate but does not improve repair, and often degrades it. Fixer SFT improves the LM-generated splits slightly but substantially degrades Human and Human-Edited LM performance. The CodeBERT variant of ASP remains strong, suggesting that the method is not tied to a single embedding model. 

E.2. Additional Ablations Embedding and similarity ablations. We ablate the k-NN pooling parameter and the embedding model used for the similarity reward in (Table 9). ASP is stable across moderate values of k and performs similarly with voyage-code-3 

and CodeBERT embeddings.                

> Table 9. Embedding and k-NN ablations. We vary the k-NN pooling parameter using voyage-code-3 embeddings and compare against CodeBERT .
> kAvg Fix Rate (%)
> 134.7 5 (default) 36.1 10 35.8 20 35.0
> Embedding Avg Fix Rate (%)
> voyage-code-3 (default) 36.1 CodeBERT 36.4

Updating the generator on mixed episodes. Reference mixing replaces a generated bug with a reference bug for fixer training. We do not update the generator on these mixed episodes because the bug was not sampled from the generator; applying a generator update would be off-policy or require additional fixer rollouts. Table 10 shows that updating the generator on mixed episodes reduces average fix rate from 36 .1% to 33 .6% , supporting our choice to update only the fixer on reference-mixed episodes. 18 Anchored Self-Play for Code Repair 

Table 10. Updating the generator on reference-mixed episodes. Fix rates are reported on B UG SOURCE BENCH splits.                                

> Method Human Human-Ed. LM (Qwen-7B) LM (gpt-oss) Avg
> Base Model 58.3 30.8 7.1 7.0 25.8 Fixer-Only 58.3 30.7 10.2 12.6 27.9 Self-Play 63.7 31.5 8.7 12.6 29.1
> ASP (Ours) 65.0 37.0 21.3 21.3 36.1
> ASP + gen on mixed 64.1 35.8 16.1 18.3 33.6

Decoupled generator and fixer. We test whether drift and ASP’s gains depend on sharing weights between generator and fixer. Table 11 compares shared and decoupled variants. Drift is not removed by decoupling, and ASP remains strong with separate generator and fixer weights. This suggests that drift arises from the unit-test-only reward signal rather than from weight sharing alone. 

Table 11. Shared vs. decoupled generator/fixer weights. We compare standard Self-Play and ASP with shared or separate generator and fixer models. 

Method Weights Avg Human Human-Edited LM LM (Qwen-7B) LM (gpt-oss-20b) 

Self-Play shared 20.9 31.7 24.4 12.6 15.0 Self-Play decoupled 19.6 28.5 22.5 12.0 15.5 ASP shared 35.5 64.2 37.0 18.9 22.0 ASP decoupled 34.8 61.5 36.0 18.0 23.5 

Alternate base model. We replicate the main experiments using DeepSeek-Coder-6.7B-Instruct as the base model. As shown in Table 12, Self-Play yields limited gains and slightly degrades human-originated bugs, while ASP improves all sources and gains +8 .9 pp over Self-Play on average. 

Table 12. Alternate base model. Results using DeepSeek-Coder-6.7B-Instruct as the base model. 

Method Human Human-Edited LM LM (Qwen-7B) LM (gpt-oss-20b) Avg 

Base Model 51.6 22.8 3.7 2.6 20.2 Fixer-Only 51.6 22.7 6.8 8.2 22.3 Self-Play 50.8 22.0 5.3 8.2 21.6 

ASP (Ours) 58.3 29.0 17.9 16.9 30.5 

External benchmarks and task distributions. We also evaluate on DebugBench (Tian et al., 2024), a debugging benchmark derived from LeetCode-style problems. We use the 1,340 Python buggy programs and the same fixer prompt format as in B UG SOURCE BENCH . Table 13a shows that ASP transfers to this external distribution and outperforms standard Self-Play. 

(a) Fix rates on DebugBench. Models are trained on BigCodeBench-based tasks and evaluated on DebugBench Python bugs. 

Method DebugBench 

Base Model 55.0 Codegen RL 54.3 AST-Constrained Self-Play 56.6 Fixer SFT 56.0 Fixer-Only 54.6 Self-Play 58.7 ASP ( CodeBERT ) 59.0 

ASP (Ours) 60.3 

(b) Held-out DebugBench. Models are trained and evaluated on DebugBench splits. 

Method Fix 

Qwen-7B (base) 58.0 Self-Play 58.7 

ASP (Ours) 66.3 

Table 13. DebugBench transfer and in-domain training. ASP improves over standard Self-Play both when transferred from BigCodeBench-based training to DebugBench and when trained directly on DebugBench. 

19 Anchored Self-Play for Code Repair 

## References 

Allamanis, M., Jackson-Flux, H., and Brockschmidt, M. Self-supervised bug detection and repair. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 34, pp. 27865–27876, 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips. cc/paper/2021/hash/ea96efc03b9a050d895110db8c4af057-Abstract.html .Austin, J., Odena, A., Nye, M., Bosma, M., Michalewski, H., Dohan, D., Jiang, E., Cai, C., Terry, M., Le, Q., et al. Program synthesis with large language models. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07732 , 2021. Bengio, Y., Louradour, J., Collobert, R., and Weston, J. Curriculum learning. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 41–48. ACM, 2009. Chen, L., Prabhudesai, M., Fragkiadaki, K., Liu, H., and Pathak, D. Self-questioning language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.03682 , 2025. Chen, M., Tworek, J., Jun, H., Yuan, Q., Pinto, H. P. d. O., Kaplan, J., Edwards, H., Burda, Y., Joseph, N., Brockman, G., et al. Evaluating large language models trained on code. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374 , 2021. Chen, Z., Tufano, M., Pantiuchina, J., Watson, C., Jiang, G. B., and Poshyvanyk, D. Sequencer: Sequence-to-sequence learning for end-to-end program repair. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE/ACM 41st International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) , 2019. Chen, Z., Deng, Y., Yuan, H., Ji, K., and Gu, Q. Self-play fine-tuning converts weak language models to strong language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.01335 , 2024. Cheng, J., Liu, X., Wang, C., Gu, X., Lu, Y., Zhang, D., Dong, Y., Tang, J., Wang, H., and Huang, M. Spar: Self-play with tree-search refinement to improve instruction-following in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.11605 ,2024. Colas, C., Karch, T., Sigaud, O., and Oudeyer, P.-Y. Autotelic agents with intrinsically motivated goal-conditioned reinforcement learning: a short survey. 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.09830 .Dong, K. and Ma, T. Stp: Self-play llm theorem provers with iterative conjecturing and proving. 2025. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2502.00212 .Dou, S., Jia, H., Wu, S., Zheng, H., Wu, M., Tao, Y., Zhang, M., Chai, M., Fan, J., Xi, Z., Zheng, R., Wu, Y., Wen, M., Gui, T., Zhang, Q., Qiu, X., and Huang, X. What’s wrong with your code generated by large language models? an extensive study, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.06153 .Forrest, S., Nguyen, T., Weimer, W., and Le Goues, C. A genetic programming approach to automated software repair. In 

Proceedings of the 11th Annual Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation (GECCO) , 2009. He, J., Beurer-Kellner, L., and Vechev, M. On distribution shift in learning-based bug detectors. In International conference on machine learning , pp. 8559–8580. PMLR, 2022. Hendrycks, D., Basart, S., Kadavath, S., Mazeika, M., Arora, A., Guo, E., Burns, C., Puranik, S., He, H., Song, D., et al. Measuring coding challenge competence with apps. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2021. Huang, C., Yu, W., Wang, X., Zhang, H., Li, Z., Li, R., Huang, J., Mi, H., and Yu, D. R-zero: Self-evolving reasoning llm from zero data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.05004 , 2025. Hui, B., Yang, J., Cui, Z., Yang, J., Liu, D., Zhang, L., Liu, T., Zhang, J., Yu, B., Lu, K., et al. Qwen2.5-Coder technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12186 , 2024. Jain, N., Han, K., Gu, A., Li, W.-D., Yan, F., Zhang, T., Wang, S., Solar-Lezama, A., Sen, K., and Stoica, I. Livecodebench: Holistic and contamination free evaluation of large language models for code. 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/ abs/2403.07974 .Jimenez, C. E., Yang, J., Wettig, A., Yao, S., Pei, K., Press, O., and Narasimhan, K. Swe-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues? arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06770 , 2023. 20 Anchored Self-Play for Code Repair 

Just, R., Jalali, D., and Ernst, M. D. Defects4j: A database of existing faults to enable controlled testing studies for java programs. In Proceedings of the 2014 international symposium on software testing and analysis , pp. 437–440, 2014. Kapfer, C., Stine, K., Narasimhan, B., Mentzel, C., and Cand `es, E. Marlowe: Stanford’s gpu-based computational instrument, 2025. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14751899 .Kuba, J. G., Gu, M., Ma, Q., Tian, Y., Mohan, V., and Chen, J. Language self-play for data-free training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.07414 , 2025. Le Goues, C., Holtschulte, N., Smith, E. K., Brun, Y., Devanbu, P., Forrest, S., and Weimer, W. The manybugs and introclass benchmarks for automated repair of c programs. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , 41(12):1236–1256, 2015. Lin, D., Koppel, J., Chen, A., and Solar-Lezama, A. Quixbugs: A multi-lingual program repair benchmark set based on the quixey challenge. In Proceedings Companion of the 2017 ACM SIGPLAN international conference on systems, programming, languages, and applications: software for humanity , pp. 55–56, 2017. Lin, Z., Shen, S., Shang, J., Weston, J., and Nie, Y. Learning to solve and verify: A self-play framework for code and test generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.14948 , 2025. Liu, B., Jin, C., Kim, S., Yuan, W., Zhao, W., Kulikov, I., Li, X., Sukhbaatar, S., Lanchantin, J., and Weston, J. Spice: Self-play in corpus environments improves reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.24684 , 2025. Liu, J., Xia, C. S., Wang, Y., and Zhang, L. Is your code generated by ChatGPT really correct? rigorous evaluation of large language models for code generation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36, 2023. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.01210 . arXiv:2305.01210. Long, F. and Rinard, M. Automatic patch generation by learning correct code. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages (POPL) , 2016. Madeiral, F., Urli, S., Maia, M., and Monperrus, M. Bears: An extensible Java bug benchmark for automatic program repair studies. In Proceedings of the 26th IEEE International Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering (SANER) , pp. 468–478, 2019. doi: 10.1109/SANER.2019.8667991. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1901. 06024 .Oliva, G. A., Rajbahadur, G. K., Bhatia, A., Zhang, H., Chen, Y., Chen, Z., Leung, A., Lin, D., Chen, B., and Hassan, A. E. Spice: An automated swe-bench labeling pipeline for issue clarity, test coverage, and effort estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.09108 , 2025. Parker-Holder, J., Jiang, M., Dennis, M., Samvelyan, M., Foerster, J., Grefenstette, E., and Rockt ¨aschel, T. Evolving curricula with regret-based environment design. 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.01302 .Pham, M. V., Phan, H. N., Phan, H. N., Chi, C. L., Nguyen, T. N., and Bui, N. D. Swe-synth: Synthesizing verifiable bug-fix data to enable large language models in resolving real-world bugs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.14757 , 2025. Poesia, G., Broman, D., Haber, N., and Goodman, N. D. Learning formal mathematics from intrinsic motivation. 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.00695 .Pourcel, J., Colas, C., Molinaro, G., Oudeyer, P.-Y., and Teodorescu, L. Aces: Generating a diversity of challenging programming puzzles with autotelic generative models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37: 67627–67662, 2024. Ribeiro, M. T. and Lundberg, S. Adaptive testing and debugging of NLP models. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 3253–3267, Dublin, Ireland, May 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.230. URL https://aclanthology. org/2022.acl-long.230/ .Silver, D., Schrittwieser, J., Simonyan, K., Antonoglou, I., Huang, A., Guez, A., Hubert, T., Baker, L., Lai, M., Bolton, A., et al. Mastering the game of go without human knowledge. nature , 550(7676):354–359, 2017. 21 Anchored Self-Play for Code Repair 

Sonwane, A., White, I., Lee, H., Pereira, M., Caccia, L., Kim, M., Shi, Z., Singh, C., Sordoni, A., C ˆot ´e, M.-A., and Yuan, X. Bugpilot: Complex bug generation for efficient learning of swe skills, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2510.19898 .Teodorescu, L., Colas, C., Bowers, M., Carta, T., and Oudeyer, P.-Y. Codeplay: Autotelic learning through collaborative self-play in programming environments. In IMOL 2023: Intrinsically Motivated Open-ended Learning Workshop at NeurIPS 2023 , 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=GgzfIBxa18 .Tian, R., Ye, Y., Qin, Y., Cong, X., Lin, Y., Pan, Y., Wu, Y., Hui, H., Liu, W., Liu, Z., and Sun, M. Debugbench: Evaluating debugging capability of large language models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.04621 .Wang, Y., Yang, L., Tian, Y., Shen, K., and Wang, M. Cure: Co-evolving coders and unit testers via reinforcement learning. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2025. Wei, Y., Sun, Z., McMilin, E., Gehring, J., Zhang, D., Synnaeve, G., Fried, D., Zhang, L., and Wang, S. Toward training superintelligent software agents through self-play swe-rl. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.18552 , 2025. Widyasari, R., Sim, S. Q., Lok, C., Qi, H., Phan, J., Tay, Q., Tan, C., Wee, F., Tan, J. E., Yieh, Y., et al. Bugsinpy: a database of existing bugs in python programs to enable controlled testing and debugging studies. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM joint meeting on european software engineering conference and symposium on the foundations of software engineering ,pp. 1556–1560, 2020. Wilf, A., Aggarwal, P., Parno, B., Fried, D., Morency, L.-P., Liang, P. P., and Welleck, S. Propose, solve, verify: Self-play through formal verification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.18160 , 2025. Xu, F. F., Alon, U., Neubig, G., and Hellendoorn, V. J. A systematic evaluation of large language models of code. In 

Proceedings of the 6th ACM SIGPLAN international symposium on machine programming , pp. 1–10, 2022. Yang, J., Leret, K., Jimenez, C. E., Wettig, A., Khandpur, K., Zhang, Y., Hui, B., Press, O., Schmidt, L., and Yang, D. Swe-smith: Scaling data for software engineering agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.21798 , 2025a. Yang, W., Wang, H., Liu, Z., Li, X., Yan, Y., Wang, S., Gu, Y., Yu, M., Liu, Z., and Yu, G. Coast: Enhancing the code debugging ability of llms through communicative agent based data synthesis, 2025b. URL https://arxiv.org/ abs/2408.05006 .Yasunaga, M. and Liang, P. Break-it-fix-it: Unsupervised learning for program repair. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2021. Ye, H., Martinez, M., Luo, X., Zhang, T., and Monperrus, M. Selfapr: Self-supervised program repair with test execution diagnostics. In Proceedings of the 37th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering , ASE ’22, New York, NY, USA, 2023. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450394758. doi: 10.1145/3551349. 3556926. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3551349.3556926 .Yu, W., Liang, Z., Huang, C., Panaganti, K., Fang, T., Mi, H., and Yu, D. Guided self-evolving llms with minimal human supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.02472 , 2025. Zhao, A., Wu, Y., Yue, Y., Wu, T., Xu, Q., Lin, M., Wang, S., Wu, Q., Zheng, Z., and Huang, G. Absolute zero: Reinforced self-play reasoning with zero data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.03335 , 2025. Zhuo, T. Y., Vu, M. C., Chim, J., Hu, H., Yu, W., Widyasari, R., Yusuf, I. N. B., Zhan, H., He, J., Paul, I., et al. Bigcodebench: Benchmarking code generation with diverse function calls and complex instructions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.15877 ,2024. Zirak, A. and Hemmati, H. Improving automated program repair with domain adaptation. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol. ,33(3), March 2024. ISSN 1049-331X. doi: 10.1145/3631972. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3631972 .22