Title: COBOL-Coder: Domain-Adapted Large Language Models for COBOL Code Generation and Translation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.03986v1

Published Time: Tue, 07 Apr 2026 00:55:13 GMT

Number of Pages: 31

Markdown Content:
Noname manuscript No. 

(will be inserted by the editor) 

## COBOL-Coder: Domain-Adapted Large Language Models for COBOL Code Generation and Translation 

Anh T. V. Dau · Shin Hwei Tan · Jinqiu Yang · Nghi D. Q. Bui · Anh Tuan Nguyen 

> Received: date / Accepted: date

Abstract COBOL remains a critical language for mainframe systems, yet existing large language models (LLMs) struggle to generate and translate COBOL code correctly. This paper reports our experience in developing and evaluating domain-adapted LLMs for COBOL and mainframe software en-gineering. We introduce (1) an automated data curation pipeline that com-bines compiler-guided validation with multi-stage similarity-based filtering to construct high-quality COBOL training data, and (2) COBOL-Coder , a COBOL-specialized LLM fine-tuned on the curated COBOL domain data. We evaluate COBOL-Coder to two tasks: code generation (on COBOLEval and COBOLCodeBench) and code translation (on COBOL-JavaTrans , our proposed benchmark for bidirectional COBOL–Java translation). In our ex-periment, COBOL-Coder achieves up to a 73.95% compilation success rate and 49.33 Pass@1 on COBOLEval, compared to 41.8% and 16.4 for GPT-4o, while most open-source baselines (e.g., CodeGemma, CodeLlama, Star-Coder2) fail to produce compilable programs. For Java-to-COBOL transla-tion, COBOL-Coder reaches 34.93 Pass@1, whereas general-purpose LLMs  

> Anh T. V. Dau Concordia University, Montreal, Canada E-mail: thivananh.dau@mail.concordia.ca Shin Hwei Tan Concordia University, Montreal, Canada E-mail: shinhwei.tan@concordia.ca Jinqiu Yang Concordia University, Montreal, Canada E-mail: jinqiu.yang@concordia.ca Nghi D. Q. Bui FPT Software AI Center, Vietnam E-mail: nghibdq@fpt.com Anh Tuan Nguyen FPT Software AI Center, Vietnam E-mail: anhnt446@fpt.com
> arXiv:2604.03986v1 [cs.SE] 5 Apr 2026 2Anh T. V. Dau et al.

achieve near-zero scores. To assess the usability of LLM-generated code in real-world settings, we conduct a survey with experienced COBOL develop-ers. Participants consistently report that COBOL-Coder exhibits stronger COBOL awareness, has more reliable program structure, and is better aligned with enterprise practices than general-purpose LLMs. 

Keywords COBOL · Code generation · Code translation · Large Language Model 

1 Introduction 

Large language models (LLMs) have recently become effective tools for soft-ware engineering tasks such as code generation, translation, and maintenance (Chen et al., 2021; Guo et al., 2025; OpenAI, 2023; Team et al., 2024b). Trained on large-scale code corpora, modern LLMs achieve strong perfor-mance on widely used programming languages, often approaching or surpass-ing human-level results on standard benchmarks. However, their effectiveness drops significantly when applied to legacy and low-resource programming lan-guages. COBOL, which continues to underpin mission-critical systems in bank-ing, insurance, and government (Taulli, 2020), exemplifies this gap. Despite its importance, existing LLMs perform poorly on COBOL-related tasks. On COBOLEval (BloopAI, 2024), an adaptation of HumanEval for COBOL, the top-performing model achieves only 10.37 Pass@1. Similar limitations are ob-served in other low-resource languages such as Fortran, where even advanced LLM-assisted migration remains challenging due to unresolved dependencies and inconsistencies (Joel et al., 2024). These results highlight a fundamental limitation of current LLMs in handling legacy programming languages. Producing LLMs for legacy programming languages, especially COBOL, remains challenging due to several limitations. First, such languages are in-herently low-resource: most production code resides in enterprise systems and is rarely publicly available, leading to limited training data. As a result, LLMs trained primarily on modern languages struggle to learn legacy-specific syn-tax, programming idioms, and domain conventions (Dau et al., 2024). Sec-ond, although initial benchmarks such as COBOLEval (BloopAI, 2024) have begun to support evaluation for legacy language code generation, the exist-ing benchmark landscape remains narrow in both task diversity and practical coverage. In particular, current datasets offer limited support for broader soft-ware engineering tasks such as code translation and program modernization. Third, legacy languages often differ substantially from modern programming paradigms in terms of program structures, formatting requirements, and data layouts, which makes code generation particularly challenging. Moreover, to date, relatively limited research effort has been devoted to systematically in-vestigating LLMs for legacy programming languages, which are inherently low-resource and lack large-scale training corpora. These challenges motivate the need for specialized datasets, evaluation frameworks, and modeling approaches tailored to legacy software systems. Domain-Adapted Large Language Models for COBOL Code Generation 3

In this work, we investigate whether COBOL-specific adaptation improves LLMs’ performance on COBOL tasks. We first introduce a data augmen-tation pipeline that generates high-quality COBOL training data through compiler-guided validation and multi-stage similarity-based filtering, enabling the construction of reliable instruction data for both code generation and translation tasks. Building on these resources, we develop COBOL-Coder ,a COBOL-specialized LLM fine-tuned on the curated dataset. We further present COBOL-JavaTrans , the first benchmark for bidirectional COBOL–Java translation. Finally, we complement our evaluation with a user study involv-ing experienced COBOL developers to assess the practical utility of LLM-generated code in real-world scenarios. To evaluate the effectiveness of COBOL-Coder , we conduct experiments on both code generation and code translation tasks. For code generation, we evaluate them on existing COBOL benchmarks and show that many widely used code LLMs fail to generate executable programs, while our LLMs achieve substantially higher compilation success and correctness. For code translation, we introduce COBOL-JavaTrans , a benchmark for bidirectional COBOL–Java translation derived from HumanEval (Chen et al., 2021). Our results show that general-purpose LLMs achieve near-zero performance on COBOL tasks, while our LLMs attain non-trivial results. In addition to automated evaluation, we assess the practical utility of LLM-generated code through a user study with experienced COBOL developers. Participants evaluate model outputs for both generation and translation tasks, providing qualitative and task-level feedback on correctness, readability, and adherence to established COBOL program-ming practices. Our evaluation aims to address the research questions below: 

RQ1: How well do COBOL-Coder and existing LLMs generate com-pilable and correct COBOL code? We evaluate COBOL code genera-tion on COBOLEval (BloopAI, 2024) and COBOLCodeBench (Kumar, 2025) using compilation success rate (CSR) and functional correctness (Pass@1). On COBOLEval, most open-source baselines, including CodeGemma (Team et al., 2024a), CodeLlama (Roziere et al., 2023), StarCoder2 (Lozhkov et al., 2024), and DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen (Guo et al., 2025), achieve 0% CSR and 0% Pass@1 on COBOLEval and COBOLCodeBench, while the existing best-performing GPT-4o (OpenAI, 2024b) reaches at most 41.8% CSR and 16.4 Pass@1. In contrast, COBOL-Coder -7B achieves 73.80% CSR and 44.70 Pass@1, and COBOL-Coder -14B further improves to 73.95% CSR and 49.33 Pass@1. Notably, COBOL-Coder -14B is the only model with non-trivial per-formance on COBOLCodeBench (26.09% CSR, 4.35 Pass@1). 

RQ2: How effective is COBOL-Coder at translating between COBOL and Java in both directions on COBOL-JavaTrans? On COBOL-to-Java translation, COBOL-Coder outperforms all open-source LLMs, achiev-ing 97.9% CSR and up to 83.91 Pass@1, approaching much larger general-purpose LLMs. The Java-to-COBOL translation task is substantially harder: most LLMs fail completely, while COBOL-Coder achieves 63.64% CSR / 4 Anh T. V. Dau et al. 

27.27 Pass@1 on the 7B version and 72.03% CSR / 34.93 Pass@1 on the 14B version, clearly outperforming all baselines. 

RQ3: How do experienced COBOL developers evaluate the quality and practical usefulness of LLM-generated code in realistic devel-opment scenarios? We conduct a study with experienced COBOL devel-opers to evaluate the practical usefulness of LLM-generated code in realis-tic development scenarios. Participants assessed outputs from three LLMs, including COBOL-Coder , and widely used general-purpose LLMs—GPT-4 and GPT-4o—across tasks covering COBOL code generation and bidirectional translation between COBOL and Java, ranking each solution based on func-tional correctness, readability, and adherence to conventional COBOL coding practices. Overall, COBOL-Coder is ranked first across all Java-to-COBOL translation tasks and first or tied for first in most COBOL code generation tasks. Qualitative feedback indicates that COBOL-Coder is perceived as more production-oriented and COBOL-aware, particularly in terms of pro-gram structure and alignment with enterprise development patterns. In summary, our work makes the following contributions: 

– We propose an automated data augmentation pipeline, which produces a large-scale COBOL-specific instruction-tuning corpus for the fine-tuning process. 

– We introduce COBOL-Coder , an LLM specialized for COBOL-related tasks and conduct evaluations on both COBOL code generation and trans-lation. Our results show that COBOL-Coder outperforms all current state-of-the-art open-source LLMs and GPT variants, surpassing them in terms of compilation success and functional correctness. 

– We construct COBOL-JavaTrans , the first benchmark for COBOL–Java code translation, targeting practical legacy system modernization scenarios where COBOL programs are migrated to modern languages. 

– We conduct a survey-based evaluation with experienced COBOL develop-ers, providing qualitative insights into the usability, readability, and cor-rectness of LLM-generated legacy code. 

2 Methodology 

In this section, we describe the data augmentation pipeline used to construct the training data in Section 2.1, followed by the instruction-tuning procedure presented in Section 2.2. 2.1 Curation of COBOL-specific Training Data We construct the training data for COBOL-Coder using three complemen-tary sources: ( Source 1 ) real-world COBOL programs collected from GitHub (Section 2.1.1), ( Source 2 ) synthetic COBOL programs generated via cross-language translation (Section 2.1.2), and ( Source 3 ) COBOL and mainframe knowledge sources (Section 2.1.3), as illustrated in Figure 1. Domain-Adapted Large Language Models for COBOL Code Generation 5

2.1.1 Source 1: Public COBOL Code from Github Raw COBOL       

> LLM
> (Judge)
> COBOL Compiler LLM
> (Repair)
> Public Repositories
> Compiler-Guided
> Repair
> Problem
> Generation
> Candidate
> Selection
> The Stack
> V2-dedup-Java
> LLM
> (Translator)
> Filtering
> Source 1: Public COBOL
> Source 2: Synthetic COBOL
> Ktimes
> LLM
> (Scorer)
> (Java, COBOL)
> pairs
> LLM
> (Translator)
> Back
> Translation
> Back-Translated
> Java
> AST-based
> Similarity Scoring
> (Java, COBOL)
> pairs
> Stage 1: Compiler-based Validation
> Stage 2: Similarity-based Validation
> (COBOL, Back-
> Translated Java) pairs
> (Description, COBOL)
> pairs
> Problem
> Descriptions
> LLMs
> (Generators)
> Stage 3: Instruction Generation
> Compilable COBOL
> (Source 1)
> Similarity-Validated
> COBOL (Source 2)
> Source 3: COBOL and Mainframe Knowledge Sources
> Question-Answer
> pairs
> LLM
> (Synthesizer)
> Content Extraction
> Textual Corpus
> Segmentation
> Paragraphs
> Question-Answer
> Generation
> Compilable COBOL
> Original Java
> Licensed textbooks
> Websites
> Compilable
> COBOL (Source 2)

Fig. 1 Overview of the automated data augmentation pipeline. 

We mine real-world COBOL programs from public GitHub repositories using the GitHub Search API. Rather than collecting entire repositories, we adopt a file-level retrieval strategy by querying COBOL-related keywords (e.g., 

COBOL, COBOL-85, COBOL-2002 ) in combination with standard file ex-tensions (e.g., .cbl, .cob, .cobol, .cbx ). Archived and forked repositories are excluded as these repositories are either not actively maintained or duplicated repositories. After data collection, we use a filter to remove low-quality files. First, we discard files containing fewer than 20 lines of code. Such files frequently corre-spond to incomplete examples, configuration stubs, copybooks with minimal content, or placeholder files that contribute limited semantic value. Addition-ally, files exceeding 50,000 lines are excluded, as they are often the result of concatenated binaries or code conversion artifacts that deviate substantially from standard COBOL development practices. We further eliminate non-text files and files with an unusually high proportion of non-alphanumeric charac-6 Anh T. V. Dau et al. 

ters, which typically indicate corrupted content or encoding issues. To mit-igate redundancy and reduce the risk of memorization during model train-ing, we incorporate a dedicated deduplication stage in the pipeline. We em-ploy MinHash-based fingerprinting combined with Locality Sensitive Hashing (LSH) to identify near-duplicate COBOL files. Files with high content simi-larity are clustered together, and only a single representative file is retained from each cluster. This step removes duplicated source files that arise from code reuse across repositories while preserving diversity in coding patterns and program logic. After completing the above preprocessing steps, the corpus consists of 40,829 unique COBOL source files. These cleaned programs form the input to the first stage of our data construction pipeline in Figure 1. 

Stage 1: Compiler-based Validation. A key challenge in constructing large-scale COBOL training corpora is that a substantial portion of real-world code does not compile out of the box. Public repositories frequently contain incomplete programs, outdated dialects, missing copybooks, inconsistent data definitions, or syntactic deviations across compiler implementations (Ali et al., 2023; Lei et al., 2025; Litecky, 1974) . Naively discarding such files would sig-nificantly reduce data volume and bias the dataset toward overly clean or trivial examples. To address this issue, we implement a compiler-based vali-dation process with a self-debugging mechanism, using compiler feedback to repair defective COBOL programs into syntactically correct training samples. In this stage, each cleaned COBOL file obtained from the preprocessing step is first compiled using a standard COBOL compiler (GnuCOBOL 1). If compilation errors occur, the compiler produces diagnostic messages in the form of a compilation log. The original source code and the corresponding com-piler log are jointly provided to an LLM (Repair), instantiated using GPT-4o (OpenAI, 2024b), which is instructed to act as an experienced COBOL devel-oper to fix uncompilable programs. The LLM is tasked with (i) interpreting the compiler diagnostics, (ii) reasoning about the underlying causes of the reported errors, and (iii) generating a revised version of the program that resolves all compilation issues while preserving the original program intent. The corrected program is then recompiled to verify its validity. If compila-tion errors persist, the updated error messages are fed back to the LLM in a subsequent iteration, forming a compiler-in-the-loop self-debugging cycle. This process continues until either the program compiles successfully or a predefined maximum number of iterations K = 3 is reached. Only programs that com-pile without errors are retained for downstream use. We provide all prompts used for LLM-based generation, translation, and evaluation in Appendix A to ensure reproducibility. After this stage, we obtain 31,492 compilable COBOL programs, com-prising approximately 38.4 million tokens in total, which form the core code corpus used for subsequent instruction construction and fine-tuning. As these   

> 1https://gnucobol.sourceforge.io/ Domain-Adapted Large Language Models for COBOL Code Generation 7

programs originate from real-world repositories, they are directly used for in-struction generation without requiring additional semantic validation. 

Stage 3: Instruction Generation. For real-world COBOL programs, the compilable programs obtained after compiler-based validation are directly used as inputs to this stage. While Stage 1 ensures syntactic correctness, this stage focuses on generating high-quality problem descriptions that correspond to the given COBOL programs. Prior studies have shown that LLMs are effective at natural language generation and semantic abstraction, making them well-suited for synthesizing task specifications from source code (Dau et al., 2024; Wei et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2023). Therefore, we leverage LLMs to transform validated COBOL programs into well-structured coding problems. Given a validated COBOL program, we employ multiple LLMs to inde-pendently generate candidate problem descriptions. Each candidate includes a natural-language task specification, input/output requirements, and func-tional constraints inferred from the program behavior. In our implementation, we use GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023), GPT-4o-mini (OpenAI, 2024a), GPT-oss-120B (OpenAI, 2025), and CodeLlama-70B (Roziere et al., 2023) as generators to produce diverse candidate instructions for each program. Next, we perform instruction validation and selection using an LLM as a judge. In this setting, the judge model does not generate new content but instead evaluates and ranks multiple candidate instructions corresponding to the same COBOL program. All candidate descriptions are provided to GPT-4o OpenAI (2024b), which evaluates correctness, completeness, and alignment with the program logic to select the most faithful and informative descrip-tion. Each sample is then packaged into a standardized instruction format consisting of (i) a problem description specifying the task requirements, (ii) an input/output description detailing data formats and assumptions, (iii) the solution represented by the validated COBOL program, and (iv) a natural-language explanation summarizing the program logic. Through this process, we obtain high-quality instruction–solution pairs that support COBOL code generation during fine-tuning. 

2.1.2 Source 2: Synthetic COBOL Code via Code Translation 

Although COBOL source code is available in public repositories, its volume is orders of magnitude smaller than that of modern programming languages such as Java and Python. General-purpose code LLMs are typically trained on extremely large corpora: StarCoder2 (Lozhkov et al., 2024) is trained on ap-proximately 3.3–4.3 trillion tokens of source code; the DeepSeek-Coder series (Guo et al., 2024) has approximately 2 trillion tokens sourced from 87 pro-gramming languages, and Magicoder (Wei et al., 2023) leverages more than 75K synthetic instruction examples in addition to large-scale pretraining. By comparison, the limited amount of publicly available COBOL code is insuffi-cient for effectively fine-tuning LLMs toward COBOL-specific generation. This data scarcity motivates the need for synthetic data augmentation. 8 Anh T. V. Dau et al. 

To mitigate this limitation, we generate synthetic COBOL data via cross-language translation, exploiting the semantic overlap between COBOL and modern languages. Translating programs from a high-resource language into COBOL enables the transfer of general programming patterns into the low-resource COBOL domain (Gandhi et al., 2024; Sontakke et al., 2023), sub-stantially increasing both data volume and task diversity. We use the Stack-v2-dedup-Java dataset 2 as the seed corpus, which is a filtered subset of The Stack v2 (Lozhkov et al., 2024) containing permissively licensed Java code that has undergone data cleaning and decontamination. Each Java program is translated into COBOL using an LLM (Translator), instantiated with GPT-4o, producing an initial COBOL version intended to preserve the original program functionality. However, due to structural and semantic differences between the two languages, these first-pass translations often contain syntactic errors and semantic inconsistencies (Froimovich et al., 2025; Gandhi et al., 2024; Kumar et al., 2024). To ensure syntactic correctness, the translated COBOL programs are first passed through the same compiler-based validation pipeline described in Section 2.1.1. Programs that fail to compile are iteratively repaired using an LLM (Repair) guided by compiler diagnostics until they become syntactically valid or reach the maximum number of iterations. After this stage, we obtain 279,536 syntactically valid Java–COBOL pairs, which serve as inputs to the subsequent semantic validation stage. 

Stage 2: Similarity-based Validation. While Stage 1 ensures syntactic correctness, it does not guarantee that the translated COBOL programs pre-serve the behavior of the original Java programs. To address this limitation, we introduce a similarity-based validation stage that filters translation pairs based on cross-language consistency. As shown in Figure 1, this stage takes as input the original Java programs and the corresponding compilable COBOL programs obtained after Stage 1. For each Java–COBOL pair, we perform two similarity checks. First, we apply LLM-based pair scoring to evaluate whether the COBOL program captures the functionality and logic of the original Java program. Second, we perform a back-translation procedure, where the COBOL program is translated back into Java and compared with the original program using AST-based similarity scoring. 

LLM-based Pair Scoring: Given a Java–COBOL pair, we apply a pair scoring step using an LLM (Scorer), which evaluates the similarity between the two programs. The model assesses whether the translated COBOL program correctly captures the functionality, control flow, and data transformations of the original Java code. The LLM is prompted to assign a similarity score in the range [0 , 1] along with a brief explanation. Only pairs with similarity scores above a threshold τ1 = 0 .6 are retained for further validation. As a result of this filtering process, 225,987 pairs are retained. The distribution of similarity scores (see Appendix 3) shows that most pairs cluster in the higher score range, indicating that a large portion of translations preserve   

> 2https://huggingface.co/datasets/bigcode/the-stack-v2-dedup Domain-Adapted Large Language Models for COBOL Code Generation 9

core functionality. Based on this distribution, we set τ1 = 0 .6 to retain pairs with relatively high similarity while filtering out low-quality translations. 

AST-based Similarity Scoring: Next, we perform a back-translation proce-dure to further verify the consistency. The validated COBOL program is trans-lated back into Java using an LLM (Translator), producing a back-translated Java version. We then compare the original Java program with the back-translated Java program using an AST-based similarity scoring, which con-sists of two steps: AST normalization and similarity measurement. First, to reduce noise introduced by superficial naming differences, we normalize both Java programs by abstracting identifier names. We use the Spoon framework 3

(Pawlak et al., 2015) to parse each program into its abstract syntax tree (AST) representation and systematically rename variables, method parameters, and local identifiers into a canonical form. This process ensures that the compar-ison focuses on structural properties rather than changes in identifier names. After normalization, we compute the similarity between the original and back-translated Java programs using CodeBERTScore (Zhou et al., 2023), which leverages contextual embeddings from a pre-trained model (CodeBERT) and computes token-level cosine similarity between the two programs. Pairs are retained only if their similarity scores exceed the threshold τ2 = 0 .7. We fur-ther analyze the effect of the normalization step in Appendix 4. Based on this distribution, where most pairs cluster above 0.7, we set τ2 = 0 .7 to retain pairs with high similarity while filtering out inconsistent translations. After semantic validation, the filtered COBOL programs are used as in-puts to the instruction generation stage (Stage 3), where we construct problem descriptions and standardized instruction–solution pairs following the same procedure described in Section 2.1.1. Through this multi-stage pipeline, we obtain a large synthetic dataset consisting of Java–COBOL translation pairs, COBOL–Java translation pairs, and description–code instruction pairs, as summarized in Table 1. 

2.1.3 Source 3: COBOL and Mainframe Knowledge Sources 

In addition to source code, we curate a corpus of textual resources covering COBOL and mainframe knowledge. These sources include licensed textbooks, tutorials, and technical websites that describe COBOL syntax, data struc-tures, file systems, and execution environments. To ensure high content quality, we focus on explanatory and instruction-oriented materials, while excluding community-driven conversational sources (e.g., Stack Overflow, discussion fo-rums, and mailing lists), which often emphasize problem-specific fixes rather than systematic domain knowledge. For textbook sources, we obtain licensed PDF copies and extract text using the pdftotext 4 library. The extracted content is subsequently normalized and filtered to remove corrupted pages and non-informative segments.                    

> 3https://github.com/INRIA/spoon/
> 4https://github.com/jalan/pdftotext 10 Anh T. V. Dau et al.
> Table 1 The COBOL fine-tuning dataset across data sources and instruction formats. Data Source Instruction Format Token Count # Instances GitHub Repositories Description—Code 38.4M 31,492 Synthetic COBOL COBOL-Java 206M 173,042 Java-COBOL 170M 173,042 Description—Code 230M 172,759 COBOL Knowledge Sources Question-Answer 241M 153,415

For web-based sources, we implement a custom content extraction pipeline tailored to technical documents. We extract the main textual content by prun-ing the document structure and removing non-informative elements such as navigation menus, advertisements, sidebars, footers, and boilerplate text. This process combines tag-based filtering with keyword-based heuristics to preserve code blocks, tables, and structured examples while discarding irrelevant con-tent. To further improve data quality, we remove duplicated documents and normalize formatting to maintain paragraph structure and code–text align-ment. After cleaning and filtering, the resulting documentation corpus consists of 18,498 high-quality text files, comprising approximately 37 million tokens. Rather than directly using raw documentation as training data, we transform the corpus into instruction-style data for two main reasons. First, generating derived question–answer pairs helps mitigate potential copyright concerns by avoiding direct reproduction of proprietary or licensed content. Second, prior work shows that instruction-style data is more effective for training LLMs, whereas raw documentation often contains redundant or non-instructional in-formation (Abdin et al., 2024; Rowberry, 2025). Following the pipeline shown in Figure 1, we segment the extracted corpus into paragraphs and use an LLM (Synthesizer) to generate question–answer pairs for each segment. This process enables the model to learn underlying concepts and usage patterns rather than memorizing raw text. In total, we obtain 153,415 question–answer pairs. Combined with the curated source code datasets, this data provides contextual information, enabling COBOL-Coder 

to better capture COBOL-specific concepts and practices beyond the source code information. We summarize the statistics of the constructed fine-tuning dataset across all sources and instruction formats in Table 1. 2.2 Instruction Tuning Details 

Model Architecture and Base Model Selection. COBOL-Coder is fine-tuned on top of the Qwen2.5-Coder model family (Hui et al., 2024), the leading code LLM 5. Qwen2.5-Coder is pretrained on a mixture of programming lan-guages and natural language, with architectural design choices optimized for   

> 5https://huggingface.co/spaces/bigcode/bigcode-models-leaderboard Domain-Adapted Large Language Models for COBOL Code Generation 11

code understanding and generation, including long-context support and strong instruction-following capabilities. These properties make it a suitable founda-tion for the adaptation to legacy programming languages such as COBOL. Rather than introducing task-specific architectural changes, our approach fo-cuses on language specialization through fine-tuning, similar to the previous work (Wei et al., 2023). By retaining the base architecture, we ensure stable training, reproducibility, and fair comparison with existing code LLMs. This also allows us to isolate the effects of COBOL-adaptive data curation on down-stream performance. Unless otherwise specified, all experiments are conducted using the 7B and 14B parameter versions of Qwen2.5-Coder. We refer to the resulting variants of the COBOL-adapted model as COBOL-Coder , which inherit the general reasoning capabilities of the base model while acquiring specialized knowledge of COBOL syntax and mainframe conventions. 

Training Details. We fine-tune all LLMs with a maximum sequence length of 4,096 tokens. Training is performed with the AdamW optimizer Kinga et al. (2015), using β1 = 0 .9, β 1 = 0 .95 , ϵ = 10 −8 , and a weight decay of 0.1. We adopt a cosine learning rate schedule with a linear warm-up of 1,000 steps, followed by a smooth decay to one-thirtieth of the peak learning rate. For 

COBOL-Coder -7B, the learning rate is set to 2 × 10 −5, while for COBOL-Coder -14B, we use a lower learning rate 1 ×10 −5 to ensure training stability at a larger scale. All versions are trained with a global batch size of 2,048 samples, with inputs packed into sequences of fixed length to maximize throughput. No dropout is applied during fine-tuning. LLMs are trained until convergence or early stopping based on validation performance. 

3 Evaluation 

Our evaluation aims to answer the research questions below: RQ1: How well do COBOL-Coder and existing LLMs generate compilable and correct COBOL code? RQ2: How effective is COBOL-Coder at translating between COBOL and Java in both directions on COBOL-JavaTrans ?RQ3: How do experienced COBOL developers evaluate the quality and prac-tical usefulness of LLM-generated code in realistic development scenarios? 3.1 Experiment Setup 

3.1.1 Baseline Models 

We consider a wide range of baseline models, including recent high-performing open-source code LLMs such as DeepSeek-Coder (Guo et al., 2024), CodeGemma (Team et al., 2024a), CodeLlama (Roziere et al., 2023), StarCoder2 (Lozhkov et al., 2024), Qwen2.5-Coder (Hui et al., 2024), and DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen (Guo et al., 2025). We additionally evaluate Mainframer (BloopAI, 2024), the 12 Anh T. V. Dau et al. 

state-of-the-art LLM specifically designed for COBOL code generation. To in-vestigate the effectiveness of general-purpose LLMs, we also evaluate several variants of GPT models: GPT-oss (OpenAI, 2025), GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023), and GPT-4o (OpenAI, 2024b). 

3.1.2 Metrics 

We assess the correctness of both generated and translated code using two metrics, including the Compilation Success Rate (CSR) and Pass@1. 

CSR: It measures the proportion of generated solutions that compile success-fully. We use the corresponding compiler for different languages (e.g., Gnu-COBOL —version 2.0.0 for COBOL and javac —version 17.0.18 for Java). 

Pass@1: Pass@1 evaluates functional correctness by measuring the percentage of tasks for which the model’s first generated solution passes all test cases. 

3.1.3 Implementation Details 

We evaluate 11 LLMs for our experiments. All experiments on the open-source models, COBOL-Coder , and GPT-oss-120B are conducted on our local ma-chine under the same computational settings. We use the official API interface (OpenAI, 2023, 2024b) to run GPT-4 and GPT-4o. The hyperparameters for the evaluation process are set as follows: temperature = 0 .0 and n = 1, which means that we only consider LLMs’ first candidates for evaluation. All other hyperparameters are kept by default. To mitigate the impact of LLM random-ness on result reliability, following prior works (Liu et al., 2023; Yan et al., 2023), we repeat the experiments three times under the same settings and re-port the averaged results. All evaluations are performed in a zero-shot setting. 

3.1.4 Benchmarks 

Next, we describe the benchmarks used in this study to evaluate COBOL code generation and code translation. 

Benchmarks for Code Generation. To evaluate COBOL-related capa-bilities of LLMs, we employ two established COBOL code generation bench-marks—COBOLEval (BloopAI, 2024) and COBOLCodeBench (Kumar, 2025). COBOLEval is the first benchmark specifically designed for COBOL code generation. It consists of 146 programming tasks manually translated from the widely used HumanEval benchmark (Chen et al., 2021), where each task provides a COBOL function signature and a natural language specification. COBOLCodeBench further increases evaluation difficulty by adapting 46 tasks from BigCodeBench-Hard (Zhuo et al., 2024) to COBOL, which emphasizes realistic legacy programming scenarios commonly found in enterprise systems, such as financial computations, structured data processing, and report gener-ation. Domain-Adapted Large Language Models for COBOL Code Generation 13                            

> Table 2Comparison of COBOL-related benchmarks used in our work. Gen denotes COBOL code generation, C2J stands for COBOL-to-Java translation, and J2C represents Java-to-COBOL translation. Dataset name Source Language Task Category Dataset Size Instances Unit COBOLEval Python Gen 146 problems COBOLCodeBench Python Gen 46 problems
> COBOL-JavaTrans COBOL, Java C2J, J2C 143 pairs

Constructing the COBOL-JavaTrans Benchmark for Code Trans-lation. To the best of our knowledge, there is currently no benchmark cu-rated specifically for COBOL code translation. Existing benchmarks, such as COBOLEval (BloopAI, 2024), provide only COBOL function signatures and docstrings as model input, along with unit tests for evaluation, but do not in-clude reference COBOL implementations. As a result, they are not suitable for translation tasks that require COBOL source code as input (e.g., COBOL-to-Java translation). To address this limitation, we construct COBOL programs for HumanEval’s tasks using a vibe-coding–inspired workflow, in which LLMs generate candidate COBOL programs that are subsequently refined through repeated prompting and manual correction. As a previous study shows that AI-generated code can be low quality (Fan et al., 2023), all produced pro-grams are manually reviewed and validated for compilability and functional consistency. Due to fundamental mismatches between some HumanEval tasks and COBOL structure, not all problems can be faithfully implemented; in total, 143 of the 164 tasks are deemed suitable for COBOL implementation, meaning they can be compiled and successfully pass all the test cases. Hu-manEval is originally designed for Python, while HumanEval-X (Zheng et al., 2023) extends it to multiple programming languages by providing implementa-tions, including Java. Building on this extension, we construct our benchmark using Java solutions from HumanEval-X while adapting task specifications to ensure compatibility with COBOL. Motivated by the practical demand for migrating legacy systems to modern platforms (Hans et al., 2025; Sneed, 2010), particularly from COBOL to Java, we introduce COBOL-JavaTrans ,a COBOL–Java code translation benchmark. This benchmark enables system-atic evaluation of translation performance in both directions. In our experi-ments, we report results for COBOL-to-Java translation, reflecting real-world modernization scenarios, as well as Java-to-COBOL translation, which tests models’ ability to synthesize idiomatic legacy code from modern language in-puts. Table 2 summarizes the key differences between COBOL-JavaTrans 

and the two other benchmarks used in this work in terms of source languages 

(i.e., the language of reference solutions or the source input in translation tasks), supported task types, and dataset size. Unlike prior datasets, which focus primarily on code generation, COBOL-JavaTrans additionally sup-ports bidirectional COBOL–Java translation, enabling more comprehensive evaluation of modernization scenarios. 14 Anh T. V. Dau et al.                                                                                   

> Table 3Performance of various LLMs on COBOLEval and COBOLCodeBench. Bold
> stands for the best in the block; Bold and Underlined denotes the overall best. Model COBOLEval COBOLCodeBench CSR Pass@1 CSR Pass@1 DeepSeek-Coder 6.7B 14.98 1.37 00CodeGemma 7B 0000CodeLlama 7B 0000Mainframer 7B 69.17 6.16 00Qwen2.5-Coder 7B 10.27 0.68 00DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-7B 0000StarCoder2 7B 0000
> COBOL-Coder-7B (Ours) 73.80 44.70 13.04 0CodeLlama 13B 3.40 0.68 00Mainframer 13B 62.24 11.64 00Qwen2.5-Coder 14B 12.32 2.74 00DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-14B 0000StarCoder2 15B 0000DeepSeekCoder-V2 16B 10.27 1.37 00
> COBOL-Coder-14B (Ours) 73.95 49.33 26.09 4.35
> GPT-oss-120B 19.17 4.11 17.39 2.17
> GPT-4 24.12 15.75 13.04 0
> GPT-4o 41.80 16.40 13.04 0

4 Evaluation Results 

RQ1: Comparison of COBOL-Coder with Existing LLMs for COBOL code generation Table 3 shows the evaluation results of various LLMs on two COBOL code gen-eration benchmarks, COBOLEval and COBOLCodeBench, where the “CSR” columns represent compilation success rate (CSR), and the “Pass@1” columns represent the values for the Pass@1 metric. As shown in the results, GPT vari-ants and code-oriented LLMs, despite strong performance on modern language benchmarks, consistently struggle with COBOL. Most open-source baselines, including CodeGemma, CodeLlama, StarCoder2, and DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen, achieve 0% CSR and 0 Pass@1 on both COBOLEval and COBOL-CodeBench. Meanwhile, stronger Code LLMs such as DeepSeek-Coder 6.7B and Qwen2.5-Coder 7B achieve only 14.98% and 10.27% CSR, respectively, with Pass@1 below 1.5 on COBOLEval, and fail to generate any valid programs on COBOLCodeBench (i.e., the more challenging benchmark). The GPT vari-ants show better results: GPT-4 achieves 24.12% CSR and 15.75 Pass@1 on COBOLEval, while GPT-4o improves CSR to 41.8% but reaches only 16.4 Pass@1, and neither model exceeds 2.17 Pass@1 on COBOLCodeBench. In contrast, COBOL-Coder significantly outperforming all baselines in both syntactic correctness (CSR) and functional correctness (Pass@1). Moving from 7B to 14B parameters consistently improves performance of COBOL-Coder ,Domain-Adapted Large Language Models for COBOL Code Generation 15                                                                                        

> Table 4 Performance of various LLMs on the COBOL-JavaTrans benchmark. C2J de-notes COBOL-to-Java translation, while J2C indicates Java-to-COBOL translation. Bold
> stands for the best in the block; Bold and Underlined denotes the overall best. Model C2J J2C CSR Pass@1 CSR Pass@1 DeepSeek-Coder 6.7B 88.11 63.64 00CodeGemma 7B 76.22 48.25 00CodeLlama 7B 76.92 29.37 00Mainframer 7B 5.59 1.39 00Qwen2.5-Coder 7B 14.68 10.47 00DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-7B 83.21 55.94 00StarCoder2 7B 0000
> COBOL-Coder-7B (Ours) 97.90 81.81 63.64 27.27
> CodeLlama 13B 83.21 48.95 00Mainframer 13B 62.23 37.06 00Qwen2.5-Coder 14B 8.39 3.50 00DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-14B 70.63 60.13 00StarCoder2 15B 39.36 18.88 00DeepSeekCoder-V2 16B 95.10 75.52 00
> COBOL-Coder-14B (Ours) 97.90 83.91 72.03 34.93
> GPT-oss-120B 98.60 89.51 5.38 3.93
> GPT-4 94.40 72.73 5.45 1.73 GPT-4o 97.20 85.31 4.36 2.18

with the 14B variant achieving the highest performance on both benchmarks. 

COBOL-Coder -7B reaches 73.80% CSR and 44.70 Pass@1 on COBOLEval, outperforming all 7B baselines and exceeding GPT-4o’s Pass@1 by nearly 30. 

COBOL-Coder -14B achieves 72.95% CSR and 49.33 Pass@1 on COBOL-Eval, and is the only model to obtain non-trivial functional correctness on COBOLCodeBench with 26.09% CSR and 4.35 Pass@1. These results indicate that both COBOL-specific training and model scaling are critical for COBOL code generation. RQ2: Effective of COBOL-Coder in translating between COBOL and Java Table 4 presents the performance of various LLMs on the COBOL-JavaTrans 

benchmark for COBOL-to-Java and Java-to-COBOL translation. For the COBOL-to-Java translation task, our specialized LLMs, COBOL-Coder , consistently outperform all other open-source LLMs, achieving CSR scores of 97.90% for both sizes and Pass@1 of 81.11 and 83.91, respectively. This represents a substantial improvement in terms of performance over code LLMs such as DeepSeek-Coder, CodeLlama, and StarCoder2, highlighting the significant benefit of model specialization for COBOL code translation. Notably, even larger general-purpose LLMs like GPT-oss-120B achieve slightly higher CSR and Pass@1 (98.6% and 89.51), but at a much higher model scale, confirming 16 Anh T. V. Dau et al.                                         

> Table 5 Overview of tasks used in the practitioner survey. Gen denotes COBOL code generation, C2J denotes COBOL-to-Java translation, and J2C denotes Java-to-COBOL translation. Task ID Category Task Title Difficulty 1Gen COPYBOOK-based transaction aggregation Simple 2Gen Line-sequential file processing loop Simple 3Gen Record validation and error routing Moderate 4Gen Table search with OCCURS and SEARCH Moderate 5Gen DB2 cursor fetch and interest computation Complex 6C2J Salary bonus calculation Simple 7J2C Batch file line counting Simple 8C2J Customer record validation logic Moderate 9J2C Transaction array aggregation Moderate 10 J2C Stateful processing with business-rule termination Complex

that smaller, language-specialized LLMs can reach competitive performance. For the Java-to-COBOL direction, which is considerably more challenging, most LLMs fail to produce any successful compilations, with CSR and Pass@1 scores at 0. In contrast, COBOL-Coder achieves 63.64% CSR and 27.27 Pass@1 for the 7B version and 72.03% CSR and 34.93 Pass@1 for the 14B version. This demonstrates that our LLMs are effective in handling the re-verse translation task, where general-purpose and even larger LLMs perform poorly. GPT-based LLMs show limited success (4–5% CSR, Pass@1 below 4), further demonstrating the need for COBOL-specific training to tackle complex bidirectional translations. RQ3: Developers’ Feedback on the Quality and Usability of LLM-generated Code To complement our quantitative evaluation of LLMs for COBOL code gener-ation and translation, we conduct a survey by inviting experienced COBOL developers. The survey is designed to assess the practical utility of LLM-generated code from the perspective of practitioners actively working in this domain. We first describe the survey design and participant recruitment in Section 4.0.1. We then report observations derived from task-level rankings in Section 4.0.2 and gain insight from participants’ qualitative feedback in Section 4.0.3. 

4.0.1 Survey Design and Participants. 

Recruiting participants is inherently challenging given COBOL’s status as a legacy language with a shrinking developer community; consequently, we in-vited three professionals from our network with industrial COBOL experience: one with 1–3 years, one with 5–10 years, and one with more than 10 years of experience maintaining and developing production COBOL applications. Domain-Adapted Large Language Models for COBOL Code Generation 17 

The survey consisted of 10 tasks covering COBOL code generation and bidi-rectional translation between COBOL and Java, designed to reflect common and practical programming scenarios such as file processing, table operations, and business rule validation, ranging from relatively simple to more complex cases, as shown in Table 5. For each task, participants were presented with three LLM-generated solutions, labeled as Model A, B, and C, and asked to rank them according to three criteria: (1) functional correctness, (2) code read-ability, and (3) adherence to conventional COBOL coding practices. Figure 2 illustrates an example survey task used in our study together with COBOL code generated by three models for comparison. To reduce potential bias, the identities of the underlying models were anonymized during evaluation. The solutions were generated by COBOL-Coder -14B, and widely used general-purpose LLMs, GPT-4 and GPT-4o, respectively. Participants completed the survey individually by ranking the LLM-generated solutions for each task. At the end of the survey, they were asked to provide feedback on their experi-ence, including the perceived usefulness, clarity, and potential limitations of the generated code. IDENTIFICATION DIVISION .

PROGRAM-ID.  TRANSACTION-PROCESSOR .

ENVIRONMENT DIVISION. 

INPUT-OUTPUT SECTION. 

FILE-CONTROL. 

SELECT  TRANSACTION-FILE  ASSIGN TO 

"TRANSACTION-FILE" 

ORGANIZATION IS LINE SEQUENTIAL. 

DATA DIVISION. 

FILE SECTION. 

... 

WORKING-STORAGE SECTION. 

... 

PROCEDURE DIVISION. 

MAIN-PROCEDURE. 

OPEN INPUT  TRANSACTION-FILE 

PERFORM  UNTIL  WS-EOF-FLAG =  'Y' 

READ  TRANSACTION-FILE 

AT END 

MOVE  'Y'  TO WS-EOF-FLAG 

NOT AT END 

IF  TRANSACTION-TYPE  = 'D' 

ADD  TRANSACTION-AMOUNT  TO  WS-

TOTAL-DEPOSITS 

ELSE IF  TRANSACTION-TYPE  = 'W' 

ADD  TRANSACTION-AMOUNT  TO  WS-

TOTAL-WITHDRAWALS 

END-IF 

END-READ 

END-PERFORM 

CLOSE  TRANSACTION-FILE 

DISPLAY  "TOTAL DEPOSITS: "  WS-TOTAL-

DEPOSITS 

DISPLAY  "TOTAL WITHDRAWALS: "  WS-TOTAL-

WITHDRAWALS 

STOP RUN. 

Task 2 —  Line-

sequential file 

processing loop 

Description: 

Write the  READ loop 

logic only  (FILE 

SECTION already exists) 

to process a line-

sequential transaction file: 

- Read records until EOF 

- Accumulate total 

deposits and withdrawals 

- Set an end-of-file flag 

correctly 

Expected COBOL 

concepts: 

- READ … AT END 

- EOF flags 

- PERFORM UNTIL 

- Numeric accumulation 

DATA DIVISION. 

WORKING-STORAGE SECTION. 

... 

FILE SECTION. 

... 

PROCEDURE DIVISION .

OPEN INPUT  TRANSACTION -FILE. 

READ  TRANSACTION -FILE 

AT END SET  EOF-FLAG  TO  'Y' 

END-READ. 

PERFORM  UNTIL  EOF-FLAG =  'Y' 

ADD  DEPOSIT-AMOUNT  TO  TOTAL-DEPOSITS 

ADD  WITHDRAW-AMOUNT  TO  TOTAL-

WITHDRAWALS 

READ  TRANSACTION-FILE 

AT END SET  EOF-FLAG  TO  'Y' 

END-READ 

END-PERFORM .

DISPLAY  'TOTAL DEPOSITS: '  TOTAL-DEPOSITS. 

DISPLAY  'TOTAL WITHDRAWALS: '  TOTAL-

WITHDRAWALS. 

CLOSE  TRANSACTION-FILE. 

STOP RUN. 

WORKING-STORAGE SECTION. 

... 

PROCEDURE DIVISION. 

READ-TRANSACTION-FILE. 

PERFORM  UNTIL  EOF-FLAG =  'Y' 

READ  TRANSACTION-FILE  INTO 

CURRENT-RECORD 

AT END 

SET  EOF-FLAG  TO  'Y' 

NOT AT END 

PERFORM  PROCESS-RECORD 

END-READ 

END-PERFORM. 

PROCESS-RECORD. 

ADD  DEPOSIT-AMOUNT  TO  TOTAL-

DEPOSITS. 

ADD  WITHDRAWAL-AMOUNT  TO  TOTAL-

WITHDRAWALS. 

END PROGRAM. 

Model A (COBOL-Coder)  Model B (GPT-4)  Model C (GPT-4o) 

No OPEN/CLOSE file 

No DISPLAY results 

Unnecessary READ ... INTO 

(FILE SECTION already exists) 

Unconditional accumulation 

READ before PERFORM 

→ skips first record 

Unconditional accumulation 

FILE SECTION must precede 

WORKING-STORAGE SECTION 

Fig. 2 Example of a survey task and corresponding COBOL code generated by three mod-els. Red arrows highlight errors in code snippets. 

4.0.2 Insights from Practitioner Rankings Across Tasks 

Results Discussions. We analyze participant rankings across the ten evalu-ation tasks, grouped by task category, as shown in Table 6. 18 Anh T. V. Dau et al.                                                        

> Table 6 Rankings by three experienced COBOL developers (P1–P3) across ten tasks. Gen
> denotes COBOL code generation, C2J denotes COBOL-to-Java translation, and J2C de-notes Java-to-COBOL translation. Model A: COBOL-Coder -14B, Model B: GPT-4, and
> Model C: GPT-4o. Model identities were anonymized during evaluation. For each task, the ranking order reflects the participant’s preference from best to worst. “No preference” means that a participant assigned equal rank to all three LLMs, indicating no observable quality difference. Task ID Category P1 P2 P3 1Gen B - A - C C - B - A A - B - C 2Gen A - C - B A - C - B A - C - B 3Gen B - C - A A - B - C No preference 4Gen A - B - C A - C - B No preference 5Gen A - B - C No preference C - A - B 6C2J B - C - A B - C - A A - B - C 7J2C A - B - C A - C - B A - B - C 8C2J B - C - A C - B - A C - B - A 9J2C A - B - C C - A - B A - B - C 10 J2C A - C - B A - C - B A - C - B

COBOL Code Generation: For COBOL code generation tasks (Tasks 1–5), 

COBOL-Coder (Model A) is frequently ranked first or tied for first across participants. In simpler tasks, participants often reported that all LLMs pro-duced functionally similar solutions. In these cases, general-purpose LLMs (Models B and C) were occasionally ranked higher due to their use of explana-tory comments and more verbose descriptions. However, participants noted that the underlying code quality across models was largely comparable for these tasks, indicating that COBOL-Coder remains competitive even when not ranked first. For tasks of moderate or higher complexity, COBOL-Coder 

was preferred due to its program structure, use of batch-oriented patterns, and adherence to conventional COBOL coding practices. 

COBOL-to-Java Translation: In COBOL-to-Java translation tasks, COBOL-Coder remained competitive but did not consistently dominate. Participants often preferred GPT-4 or GPT-4o when evaluating Java, reflecting their stronger performance for high-resource, modern programming languages. Nevertheless, 

COBOL-Coder ’s translations were generally assessed as functionally correct and structurally sound. 

Java-to-COBOL Translation: In contrast, COBOL-Coder clearly out-performs GPT-4 and GPT-4o across all Java-to-COBOL translation tasks (Tasks 7, 9, and 10). Participants consistently ranked Model A ( COBOL-Coder ) first. These results align with our experimental findings in Section 3.1.4, indicating that COBOL-Coder is particularly effective when translat-ing a modern language into legacy COBOL code. 

4.0.3 Insights from Practitioner’s Qualitative Feedback 

Understanding Program Intent and COBOL Semantics: Participants consistently reported differences among the three LLMs. Rather than judging Domain-Adapted Large Language Models for COBOL Code Generation 19 

outputs purely by correctness, developers evaluated whether the generated code reflected an understanding of the program logic, how the code would be executed, and how it would evolve in a real system. COBOL-Coder (Model A) was described as more pragmatic and production-oriented, whereas GPT-4 (Model B) and GPT-4o (Model C) exhibited weaknesses either in correctness or structural appropriateness. Participants summarized this contrast as: 

“Model A felt pragmatically strong and production-oriented. Model B was inconsistent and often incorrect, while Model C understood the con-cepts but tended to overengineer the solution.” (P1 )

“Sometimes the differences between models were very clear, and some-times two models were very similar—one might be right in structure but wrong in details, while the other was the opposite.” (P2 )

COBOL Awareness and Program Structure: Across responses, COBOL-Coder (Model A) was most frequently identified as the model that best understood COBOL-specific conventions, enterprise programming style, and program organization. All three participants selected Model A as the most COBOL-aware model. 

“Model A felt the most COBOL-aware overall.” (P1 )

“Model A was closer to a typical batch-style program, especially for file processing. The other models felt more general.” (P3 )While some tasks resulted in similar code quality across LLMs, COBOL-Coder was described as more consistent in preserving program structure, whereas other LLMs “sometimes lost the structure of the program” (P2) .

Productivity and Developer Workflow: From a workflow perspective, 

COBOL-Coder was perceived as offering productivity benefits, particularly by reducing cognitive load during early development stages. Participant 2 de-scribed it as shortening the path from an initial idea to a reasonably correct draft, which is especially valuable in COBOL development and migration sce-narios where boilerplate logic and legacy constraints are common. 

“Model A reduced cognitive load. It shortened the path from idea →

correct implementation, which is exactly what improves efficiency when working with COBOL, Java migrations, and legacy logic.” (P2) 

However, participants framed this benefit within a human-in-the-loop work-flow. LLMs were viewed as accelerators rather than autonomous agents, com-parable to junior developers producing first drafts. In contrast, they found it difficult to identify clear productivity advantages for GPT-4 and GPT-4o in practical settings, particularly when their outputs required substantial re-structuring and correction. 

Requirements for Real-World Adoption: When discussing requirements for real-world usage, participants converged on several concrete expectations. First, the elimination of non-compilable constructs was considered a prereq-uisite. Second, predictable handling of operational edge cases—such as file 20 Anh T. V. Dau et al. 

status checks, handling of SQLCODE (i.e., a variable that stores the most re-cently executed SQL statement), and restartability (i.e., the ability to resume a failed batch job from an intermediate “checkpoint” instead of the start)—was viewed as essential for enterprise deployment. Third, consistent adherence to organizational copybooks, data conventions, and coding standards was identi-fied as a major barrier to adoption. Fourth, understanding copybooks, shared data layouts, job control language (JCL), which is used in mainframe batch environment, and cross-program dependencies. 

COBOL-Coder was widely regarded as the closest to meeting these re-quirements, particularly as a first-draft generator. However, participants em-phasized that deeper integration with existing mainframe ecosystems and stronger guarantees around safety and compatibility would be necessary before LLMs could be used routinely in production environments. Overall, the qualitative feedback reinforces the quantitative findings: COBOL-Coder is perceived as substantially more aligned with COBOL development practices than the baseline LLMs. At the same time, the feedback highlights that practical adoption depends not only on model accuracy but also on trust, predictability, and integration into established mainframe workflows. 

5 Related Work Large Language Models for Code Generation. LLMs have achieved strong performance across a wide range of code-related tasks. Early work such as Codex (Chen et al., 2021) demonstrated the effectiveness of large-scale pretraining on mixed natural language and source code corpora. Subsequent LLMs, including CodeLlama (Roziere et al., 2023), StarCoder (Li et al., 2023; Lozhkov et al., 2024), DeepSeek-Coder (Guo et al., 2024), and commercial sys-tems such as GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) and Claude Sonnet (Anthropic, 2025), further improved reasoning and code synthesis capabilities through instruc-tion tuning and reinforcement learning. Despite these advances, most existing code LLMs are optimized for high-resource, modern programming languages such as Python and Java. Performance on legacy languages remains limited, particularly for languages with rigid syntactic constraints and domain-specific conventions (Dau et al., 2024). Recent studies have shown that general-purpose code LLMs struggle with long-range dependencies, strict formatting rules, and low-frequency language constructs, all of which are unique characteristics of COBOL programs (BloopAI, 2024; Lei et al., 2025). Unlike prior approaches that treat code LLMs as general-purpose tools, our work demonstrates that targeted fine-tuning on curated domain-specific data consistently outperforms much larger general-purpose LLMs on legacy language tasks, highlighting the primacy of data quality over model scale in low-resource settings. 

Low Resource Languages and Domain-Specific Adaptation. Low Re-source Programming Languages (LRPLs) are characterized by the limited availability of publicly accessible training data, which leads to systematic per-formance degradation for large language models compared to high-resource Domain-Adapted Large Language Models for COBOL Code Generation 21 

programming languages (HRPLs) such as Python and Java (Joel et al., 2024). This disparity is consistently observed across modern code generation bench-marks. For example, results on the MultiPL-E (Cassano et al., 2023) bench-mark show that state-of-the-art LLMs achieve substantially higher Pass@1 scores on HRPLs than on LRPLs, with performance gaps persisting across model families and scales (Joel et al., 2024). These findings suggest that im-provements in model architecture or parameter count alone are insufficient to close the gap for low-resource languages. Domain-Specific Languages (DSLs) exhibit similar limitations. Although DSLs offer concise abstractions and improved expressiveness within special-ized domains, their niche usage results in a lack of training data and limited benchmark (Joel et al., 2024; Luo et al., 2025). Prior studies report notable performance drops when LLMs are applied to DSLs with unique syntax, se-mantics that deviate from large-corpus programming languages (Joel et al., 2024). COBOL shares core characteristics with both LRPLs and DSLs. While not niche in industrial impact, COBOL suffers from severe data scarcity in modern code corpora. As a result, general-purpose code LLMs frequently fail to generate compilable COBOL programs (Dau et al., 2024). Insights from low-resource natural language processing provide a useful lens to ad-dress these challenges. Prior work shows that domain-adaptive pretraining and targeted fine-tuning can significantly improve performance in low-resource set-tings, even when monolingual data is limited (Alyami et al., 2025; Yan et al., 2025). Techniques such as cross-lingual transfer, multilingual pretraining, and task-specific adaptation have been shown to yield more consistent gains than na¨ ıvely scaling model size (Lankford et al., 2023; Song et al., 2025). Recent studies extend these principles to code generation, showing that carefully cu-rated domain-specific datasets and objectives are often more effective than generic pretraining for low-resource languages (Joel et al., 2024; Luo et al., 2025). Our work extends these insights by treating COBOL as a low-resource programming language and applying domain-adaptive fine-tuning strategies tailored to its syntactic and semantic properties. 

Benchmarks for Code and Legacy Languages. Code-related datasets have been widely developed to support empirical research across programming languages and software engineering tasks (Austin et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021; Zhuo et al., 2024). However, legacy and low-resource programming languages, particularly COBOL, remain underrepresented, limiting reliable evaluation of LLMs for real-world legacy systems. Several COBOL benchmarks have been proposed, including OpenCBS (Lee et al., 2022), which uses public forums to construct a COBOL dataset for de-fect detection, and X-COBOL (Ali et al., 2023), which collects repositories from GitHub but relies on weak popularity-based quality filters (Borges and Valente, 2018). More recently, COBOLEval (BloopAI, 2024) and COBOL-CodeBench (Kumar, 2025) adapt modern code benchmarks to COBOL, en-abling execution-based evaluation for code generation, while MainframeBench (Dau et al., 2024) evaluates broader mainframe knowledge but not program-22 Anh T. V. Dau et al. 

level transformations. Recent work (Gandhi et al., 2024) leverages CodeNet (Puri et al., 2021), selecting problems that include both accepted COBOL and Java submissions to evaluate translation via execution-based testing. However, CodeNet originates from competitive programming platforms and is not de-signed around enterprise modernization scenarios To address this gap, we introduce COBOL-JavaTrans , a benchmark specifically designed for bidirectional COBOL–Java translation with testcases, enabling systematic evaluation of legacy–modern code translation tasks that remain largely absent from existing benchmarks. 

6 Threats to Validity Construct Validity. In our data augmentation pipeline, we primarily rely on compiler feedback and LLMs to assess and filter generated COBOL programs. Compiler-based validation provides a strong and objective signal for syntac-tic correctness and structural well-formedness, which is particularly important for COBOL. However, this approach does not fully capture deeper semantic properties. Besides, relying on LLMs to select the most faithful instruction-response pairs and descriptions may also introduce bias due to their own training data and preferences. While we partially address these limitations through execution-based metrics (e.g., Pass@1) and bidirectional translation tasks that stress semantic preservation, our pipeline does not yet perform fine-grained semantic verification beyond these checks. Future work will ex-plore richer semantic validation strategies, such as specification-based testing and expert-in-the-loop review, to further improve the quality and reliability of the curated training data. 

Internal Validity. A potential threat to internal validity arises from the scope of our dataset. In this work, we focus on file-level COBOL programs, treating each source file as an independent unit for generation, translation, and evalu-ation. This design choice simplifies benchmarking and enables controlled com-parisons across LLMs, but it does not capture cross-file dependencies, shared copybooks, or inter-program control flow that are common in real-world main-frame systems. To mitigate this limitation, we construct our benchmarks and emphasize compilation- and execution-based validation, which already enforces many structural constraints. Nevertheless, repository-level reasoning remains an open challenge. In the future, we plan to extend our pipeline to repository-level settings, where LLMs must reason over multiple interconnected source files, shared data definitions, and system-wide conventions—an essential capa-bility for large-scale legacy modernization. 

External Validity. Although our study includes multiple datasets covering code generation and bidirectional COBOL–Java translation, these benchmarks represent a subset of the diversity found in industrial mainframe environments. Real-world systems often involve proprietary libraries, organization-specific coding standards, and operational constraints that are not fully reflected in public datasets. To improve external validity, we complement evaluation with Domain-Adapted Large Language Models for COBOL Code Generation 23 

qualitative feedback from experienced COBOL developers, whose insights help contextualize model behavior in realistic development workflows. While the number of participants is necessarily limited due to the specialized expertise required, their feedback provides valuable signals about usability, structure, and production readiness. We will involve broader industrial collaboration and larger-scale evaluations to further validate the applicability of our approach across diverse enterprise settings. 

7 Reflection and Lessons Learned 

Based on our empirical study and survey, we discuss the main lessons learned from developing and evaluating LLMs for COBOL code generation and trans-lation. 

Domain specialization is essential for legacy languages. Our evaluation shows that Code LLMs struggle to generate high-quality COBOL code. While modern code-oriented LLMs perform well on modern high-resource languages, they often fail to capture COBOL-specific syntax, structural conventions, and enterprise-oriented programming patterns. This suggests that COBOL is not only low-resource but also highly contextual, shaped by decades of operational practices. Domain adaptation—through targeted data curation, training, and evaluation—is therefore critical for reliable COBOL code generation and trans-lation. 

Legacy-to-modern and modern-to-legacy translations are fundamen-tally asymmetric. We observed a clear difference in difficulty between trans-lating COBOL to Java and translating Java to COBOL. While general-purpose LLMs can often produce reasonable Java code from COBOL inputs, generat-ing idiomatic and operationally correct COBOL remains substantially harder. This asymmetry reflects deeper differences in execution LLMs, data handling, and control-flow conventions between legacy and modern languages. As a re-sult, translation tasks involving legacy targets require dedicated benchmarks and modeling strategies rather than symmetric treatment. 

LLMs are most effective as human-in-the-loop draft generators. Ex-perienced COBOL developers consistently viewed LLMs as productivity aids rather than autonomous developers. The most effective usage pattern resem-bled that of a junior developer producing an initial draft, which is then refined through compilation checks, testing, and code review. Productivity gains were most evident when the model reduced cognitive load and boilerplate effort, particularly in migration and maintenance scenarios. This highlights the im-portance of designing LLM-based tools to support assisted workflows instead of fully automated pipelines. 

Repository-level and system-level context are essential for real-world adoption. Our current evaluation focuses on single-file programs which aligns with existing benchmarks but does not fully reflect real mainframe systems. Practitioner feedback suggests that true production readiness depends on un-derstanding COBOL intrinsics such as copybooks, shared data layouts, job 24 Anh T. V. Dau et al. 

control language (JCL), and cross-program dependencies. This insight points toward repository-level and system-level modeling as a critical next step for LLMs targeting enterprise COBOL environments. 

8 Conclusion 

This paper reports our experience in studying and improving the use of large language models for COBOL. We address a gap in existing research by com-bining domain-specific data curation, model adaptation, benchmark construc-tion, and practitioner-centered evaluation for a legacy language that remains widely used in mission-critical systems. In this paper, we present an automated data augmentation pipeline to construct the COBOL training data, intro-duce COBOL-JavaTrans , a new benchmark for bidirectional COBOL–Java translation, and develop COBOL-Coder , a domain-adapted LLMs that sub-stantially outperform general-purpose LLMs on both COBOL code generation and translation tasks. Our experiment results show that domain specialization and model scaling are both necessary to achieve meaningful gains on legacy languages. We complemented these results with a qualitative study involving experienced COBOL developers working in realistic settings. Their feedback confirms that improvements measured by benchmarks translate into practical value: COBOL-Coder is perceived as more COBOL-aware and structurally reliable, especially for modernization and migration tasks. At the same time, the study highlights that human oversight and system-level context remain essential for real-world adoption.  

> Acknowledgements This work is supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) Discovery Grant RGPIN-2024-04301. The authors gratefully acknowledge the support and resources provided by Dr. Phong Xuan Nguyen of the FPT Software AI Center, Vietnam, which were essential to the completion of this work.

Declarations Funding: Not applicable. 

Ethical Approval: Not applicable. 

Informed Consent: All participants received invitation from our network and have given their signed informed consent to participate. 

Author Contributions: 

Conceptualization: Anh T. V. Dau, Shin Hwei Tan, Jinqiu Yang, Nghi D. Q. Bui, Anh Tuan Nguyen. Data Curation: Anh T. V. Dau. Methodology: Anh T. V. Dau, Shin Hwei Tan, Jinqiu Yang, Anh Tuan Nguyen. Experiment Analysis: Anh T. V. Dau, Shin Hwei Tan, Jinqiu Yang, Anh Tuan Nguyen. Supervision, supervising experiment design and execution: Shin Hwei Tan, Jinqiu Yang, Anh Tuan Nguyen. Writing – Original Draft: Anh T. V. Dau, Shin Hwei Tan, Jinqiu Yang. Writing – Review & Editing: Anh T. V. Dau, Shin Hwei Tan, Jinqiu Yang Domain-Adapted Large Language Models for COBOL Code Generation 25 

Data and Code Availability Statement: The benchmark and code used for our evaluation are publicly available: https://github.com/COBOL-Coder/ COBOL-Coder .

Conflict of Interest: The authors declare that they have no conflict of in-terest. 

Clinical Trial Number: Not applicable. 

Appendix References 

Abdin M, Aneja J, Behl H, Bubeck S, Eldan R, Gunasekar S, Harrison M, Hewett RJ, Javaheripi M, Kauffmann P, et al. (2024) Phi-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:241208905 Ali MS, Manjunath N, Chimalakonda S (2023) X-cobol: A dataset of cobol repositories. arXiv preprint arXiv:230604892 Alyami S, Jamal A, Alhothali A (2025) Domain-adaptive pre-training for arabic aspect-based sentiment analysis: A comparative study of domain adaptation and fine-tuning strategies. arXiv preprint arXiv:250916788 Anthropic (2025) Claude sonnet 4.5. URL https://www.anthropic.com/claude/sonnet 

Austin J, Odena A, Nye M, Bosma M, Michalewski H, Dohan D, Jiang E, Cai C, Terry M, Le Q, et al. (2021) Program synthesis with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:210807732 BloopAI (2024) bloop | Evaluating LLMs on COBOL. URL https://bloop.ai/blog/ evaluating-llms-on-cobol 

Borges H, Valente MT (2018) What’s in a github star? understanding repository starring practices in a social coding platform. Journal of Systems and Software 146:112–129 Cassano F, Gouwar J, Nguyen D, Nguyen S, Phipps-Costin L, Pinckney D, Yee MH, Zi Y, Anderson CJ, Feldman MQ, et al. (2023) Multipl-e: A scalable and polyglot approach to benchmarking neural code generation. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 49(7):3675–3691 Chen M, Tworek J, Jun H, Yuan Q, de Oliveira Pinto HP, Kaplan J, Edwards H, Burda Y, Joseph N, Brockman G, Ray A, Puri R, Krueger G, Petrov M, Khlaaf H, Sastry G, Mishkin P, Chan B, Gray S, Ryder N, Pavlov M, Power A, Kaiser L, Bavarian M, Winter C, Tillet P, Such FP, Cummings D, Plappert M, Chantzis F, Barnes E, Herbert-Voss A, Guss WH, Nichol A, Paino A, Tezak N, Tang J, Babuschkin I, Balaji S, Jain S, Saunders W, Hesse C, Carr AN, Leike J, Achiam J, Misra V, Morikawa E, Radford A, Knight M, Brundage M, Murati M, Mayer K, Welinder P, McGrew B, Amodei D, McCandlish S, Sutskever I, Zaremba W (2021) Evaluating large language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:210703374 2107.03374 

Dau AT, Dao HT, Nguyen AT, Tran HT, Nguyen PX, Bui ND (2024) Xmainframe: A large language model for mainframe modernization. arXiv preprint arXiv:240804660 Fan Z, Gao X, Mirchev M, Roychoudhury A, Tan SH (2023) Automated repair of pro-grams from large language models. In: 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), IEEE, pp 1469–1481 Froimovich S, Gal R, Ibraheem W, Ziv A (2025) Quality evaluation of cobol to java code transformation. arXiv preprint arXiv:250723356 Gandhi S, Patwardhan M, Khatri J, Vig L, Medicherla RK (2024) Translation of low-resource cobol to logically correct and readable java leveraging high-resource java refinement. In: Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on Large Language Models for Code, pp 46–53 Guo D, Zhu Q, Yang D, Xie Z, Dong K, Zhang W, Chen G, Bi X, Wu Y, Li Y, et al. (2024) Deepseek-coder: When the large language model meets programming–the rise of code intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:240114196 26 Anh T. V. Dau et al. Guo D, Yang D, Zhang H, Song J, Zhang R, Xu R, Zhu Q, Ma S, Wang P, Bi X, et al. (2025) Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:250112948 Hans S, Kumar A, Yasue T, Ono K, Krishnan S, Sondhi D, Satoh F, Mitchell G, Kumar S, Saha D (2025) Automated testing of cobol to java transformation. In: Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on the Foundations of Software Engineering, pp 227–237 Hui B, Yang J, Cui Z, Yang J, Liu D, Zhang L, Liu T, Zhang J, Yu B, Lu K, et al. (2024) Qwen2. 5-coder technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:240912186 Joel S, Wu J, Fard F (2024) A survey on llm-based code generation for low-resource and domain-specific programming languages. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology Kinga D, Adam JB, et al. (2015) A method for stochastic optimization. In: International conference on learning representations (ICLR), California;, vol 5 Kumar A, Saha D, Yasue T, Ono K, Krishnan S, Hans S, Satoh F, Mitchell G, Kumar S (2024) Automated validation of cobol to java transformation. In: Proceedings of the 39th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering, pp 2415–2418 Kumar H (2025) URL https://huggingface.co/datasets/harshini-kumar/ CobolCodeBench 

Lankford S, Afli H, Way A (2023) adaptmllm: Fine-tuning multilingual language models on low-resource languages with integrated llm playgrounds. Information 14(12):638 Lee D, Henley AZ, Hinshaw B, Pandita R (2022) Opencbs: An open-source cobol defects benchmark suite. In: 2022 IEEE International Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolution (ICSME), IEEE, pp 246–256 Lei F, Liu J, Noei S, Zou Y, Truong D, Alexander W (2025) Enhancing cobol code explanations: A multi-agents approach using large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:250702182 Li R, Allal LB, Zi Y, Muennighoff N, Kocetkov D, Mou C, Marone M, Akiki C, Li J, Chim J, et al. (2023) Starcoder: may the source be with you! arXiv preprint arXiv:230506161 Litecky CR (1974) A study of errors, error-proneness, and error diagnosis of programming languages with special reference to cobol. University of Minnesota Liu J, Xia CS, Wang Y, Zhang L (2023) Is your code generated by chatgpt really correct? rigorous evaluation of large language models for code generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36:21558–21572 Lozhkov A, Li R, Allal LB, Cassano F, Lamy-Poirier J, Tazi N, Tang A, Pykhtar D, Liu J, Wei Y, et al. (2024) Starcoder 2 and the stack v2: The next generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:240219173 Luo W, Keung JW, Yang B, Klein J, Bissyande TF, Tian H, Le B (2025) Unlocking llm repair capabilities in low-resource programming languages through cross-language translation and multi-agent refinement. arXiv preprint arXiv:250322512 OpenAI (2023) Gpt-4 is openai’s most advanced system, producing safer and more useful responses. URL https://openai.com/index/gpt-4/ 

OpenAI (2024a) Gpt-4o mini: advancing cost-efficient intelligence. URL https://openai. com/index/gpt-4o-mini-advancing-cost-efficient-intelligence/ 

OpenAI (2024b) Hello gpt 4o. URL https://openai.com/index/hello-gpt-4o/ 

OpenAI (2025) Introducing gpt-oss. URL https://openai.com/index/ introducing-gpt-oss/ 

Pawlak R, Monperrus M, Petitprez N, Noguera C, Seinturier L (2015) Spoon: A Li-brary for Implementing Analyses and Transformations of Java Source Code. Soft-ware: Practice and Experience 46:1155–1179, DOI 10.1002/spe.2346, URL https://hal. archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01078532/document 

Puri R, Kung DS, Janssen G, Zhang W, Domeniconi G, Zolotov V, Dolby J, Chen J, Choudhury M, Decker L, et al. (2021) Codenet: A large-scale ai for code dataset for learning a diversity of coding tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:210512655 Rowberry S (2025) The value of books in the age of generative ai training data. Convergence p 13548565251358020 Roziere B, Gehring J, Gloeckle F, Sootla S, Gat I, Tan XE, Adi Y, Liu J, Sauvestre R, Remez T, et al. (2023) Code llama: Open foundation models for code. arXiv preprint Domain-Adapted Large Language Models for COBOL Code Generation 27 arXiv:230812950 Sneed HM (2010) Migrating from cobol to java. In: 2010 IEEE International Conference on Software Maintenance, IEEE, pp 1–7 Song Y, Li L, Lothritz C, Ezzini S, Sleem L, Gentile N, State R, Bissyand´ e TF, Klein J (2025) Is llm the silver bullet to low-resource languages machine translation? arXiv preprint arXiv:250324102 Sontakke A, Kalra K, Patwardhan M, Vig L, Medicherla RK, Naik R, Pradhan S (2023) Knowledge transfer for pseudo-code generation from low resource programming language. arXiv preprint arXiv:230309062 Taulli T (2020) COBOL Language: Call It A Comeback? URL https://www.forbes.com/ sites/tomtaulli/2020/07/13/cobol-language-call-it-a-comeback/ 

Team C, Zhao H, Hui J, Howland J, Nguyen N, Zuo S, Hu A, Choquette-Choo CA, Shen J, Kelley J, et al. (2024a) Codegemma: Open code models based on gemma. arXiv preprint arXiv:240611409 Team Q, et al. (2024b) Qwen2 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:240710671 2(3) Wei Y, Wang Z, Liu J, Ding Y, Zhang L (2023) Magicoder: Empowering code generation with oss-instruct. arXiv preprint arXiv:231202120 Yan G, Peng K, Wang Y, Tan H, Du J, Wu H (2025) Adaft: An efficient domain-adaptive fine-tuning framework for sentiment analysis in chinese financial texts. Applied Intelligence 55(7):701 Yan W, Tian Y, Li Y, Chen Q, Wang W (2023) Codetransocean: A comprehensive multi-lingual benchmark for code translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:231004951 Yu Y, Zhuang Y, Zhang J, Meng Y, Ratner AJ, Krishna R, Shen J, Zhang C (2023) Large language model as attributed training data generator: A tale of diversity and bias. Ad-vances in neural information processing systems 36:55734–55784 Zheng Q, Xia X, Zou X, Dong Y, Wang S, Xue Y, Shen L, Wang Z, Wang A, Li Y, et al. (2023) Codegeex: A pre-trained model for code generation with multilingual benchmark-ing on humaneval-x. In: Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp 5673–5684 Zhou S, Alon U, Agarwal S, Neubig G (2023) Codebertscore: Evaluating code generation with pretrained models of code URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.05527 

Zhuo TY, Vu MC, Chim J, Hu H, Yu W, Widyasari R, Yusuf INB, Zhan H, He J, Paul I, et al. (2024) Bigcodebench: Benchmarking code generation with diverse function calls and complex instructions. arXiv preprint arXiv:240615877 28 Anh T. V. Dau et al. 

Appendix A Prompts Used in the Data Construction Pipeline 

A.1 Compiler-Guided Repair Prompt 

You are an experienced COBOL software engineer with deep knowledge of COBOL syntax, structure, and best practices. Your task is to perform debugging on a given COBOL program with the compilation errors. Below is the original COBOL code followed by the compiler’s error log. Your job is to revise the code to resolve all compilation errors, ensuring that the corrected program is not only syntactically valid but also logically sound. Please carefully analyze the error messages and update the code accordingly. Pri-oritize clarity, maintainability, and adherence to COBOL’s structural rules. Input: COBOL Code: 

[COBOL code] 

Compiler Error Log: 

[Error log] 

A.2 LLM-based Pair Scoring Prompt 

You are an expert software engineer with deep knowledge of both COBOL and Java. Your task is to evaluate whether the following two programs are semantically equivalent. Program 1 (COBOL): 

[COBOL Code] 

Program 2 (Java): 

[Java Code] 

Evaluate their similarity based on the following criteria: 1. Do both programs implement the same functionality? 2. Do they produce the same outputs for the same inputs? 3. Are there any logical differences, missing steps, or incorrect translations? 4. Ignore differences in syntax, formatting, or variable naming. Scoring: - 1.0 = Fully equivalent (same logic and behavior) - 0.7-0.9 = Minor differences but mostly equivalent - 0.4-0.6 = Partial similarity (some logic mismatch) - 0.0–0.3 = Not equivalent Output your answer in the following format: Score: [number between 0 and 1.0] Explanation: [brief explanation of reasoning] Domain-Adapted Large Language Models for COBOL Code Generation 29 

A.3 Back Translation Prompt 

You are a senior engineer specializing in COBOL and Java. Translate the following COBOL snippet into Java. CRITICAL CONSTRAINTS (follow strictly) 1. Minimalism first: output ONLY the Java code required to reflect what appears in the COBOL snippet. 2. Do NOT add any “helpful” extras: no getters/setters, no beans, no padding util-ities, no data validation, no additional methods, no comments explaining mapping, no test plan, no assumptions section, no package/imports unless strictly required for compilation. 3. Do NOT invent structure or frameworks. If COBOL defines data items but they are never used by PROCEDURE DIVISION logic, you must NOT create Java classes for them. (You may ignore unused data definitions entirely.) 4. If the COBOL PROCEDURE DIVISION only prints messages and stops, the Java output should only contain a single class with main() that prints the same messages and returns. 5. Preserve literals and observable behavior exactly: - DISPLAY to System.out.print/println (choose print vs println to best match; default to println unless COBOL shows no newline requirement). - STOP RUN to return from main (no System.exit unless COBOL implies abnormal termination). 6. Keep formatting simple and close to typical “plain Java” style: 7. If the COBOL is missing required info for a valid Java identifier or class name, use the closest safe name and do not add explanations. OUTPUT FORMAT Return ONE Java code block only, no additional text. Here is the given COBOL code: 

[COBOL code] 

A.4 Instruction Generation Prompt 

You are exceptionally skilled at crafting high-quality COBOL programming prob-lems and offering precise solutions. Please gain inspiration from the following code snippet to create a high-quality programming problem. If the given code is not COBOL, return None Otherwise, present your output in two distinct sections: [Problem Description] and [Solution]. Code snippet for inspiration: 

[COBOL code] 

Guidelines for each section: 1. [Problem Description]: This should be completely self-contained, providing all the contextual information one needs to understand and solve the problem. Assume common programming knowledge, but ensure that any specific context, variables, or code snippets pertinent to this problem are explicitly included. 2. [Solution]: Offer a comprehensive, correct solution that accurately addresses the [Problem Description] you provided. 30 Anh T. V. Dau et al. 

A.5 Candidate Selection Prompt 

You are an expert in designing high-quality COBOL programming problems and providing accurate solutions. You will be given four problem descriptions, each corresponding to the same COBOL code snippet. Your task is to carefully evaluate the given options and select the most suitable problem description based on its clarity, relevance, and alignment with the provided code. Instructions: 1. Analyze all three options thoroughly. 2. Select the option that best matches and explains the code. 3. At the end of your response, indicate your choice in the following format: [Best option: X], where X is the number of the selected option. Code snippet for reference: 

[COBOL code] 

Option 1: [ Description 1 ]Option 2: [ Description 2 ]Option 3: [ Description 3 ]Option 4: [ Description 4 ]

B Similarity Score Distributions 

B.1 LLM-based Pair Scoring Distribution B.2 CodeBERTScore Distribution (with vs without normalization) Domain-Adapted Large Language Models for COBOL Code Generation 31 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

Pair Similarity Score 

0

10000 

20000 

30000 

40000 

50000 

60000 

70000 

> Number of Program Pairs

Distribution of Pair Similarity Scores for Java COBOL Programs 

Mean = 0.68 

Fig. 3 Distribution of Pair Similarity Scores in LLM-based Pair Scoring (Java–COBOL) 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

> CodeBERTScore
> 0
> 10000
> 20000
> 30000
> 40000
> 50000
> 60000
> 70000
> 80000
> Number of Program Pairs

Without AST-based Normalization      

> Mean = 0.69
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> CodeBERTScore

With AST-based Normalization 

> Mean = 0.75

Fig. 4 Distribution of CodeBERTScore With and Without AST-based normalization.