Title: Graph Construction and Matching for Imperative Programs using Neural and Structural Methods

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.26578v1

Published Time: Thu, 30 Apr 2026 00:48:50 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
# Graph Construction and Matching for Imperative Programs using Neural and Structural Methods 

Arshad Beg 1, Diarmuid O’Donoghue 1, and Rosemary Monahan 1

Maynooth University, Maynooth, Ireland, 

arshad.beg@mu.ie, diarmuid.odonoghue@mu.ie, rosemary.monahan@mu.ie ,

Abstract. Reusing verification artefacts requires identifying structural and semantic similarities across programs and their specifications. In this paper, we focus on graph construction as a foundational step to-ward this goal. We present a pipeline that converts imperative programs and their annotations into typed, attributed graphs. Our experiments cover datasets including C with ACSL, Java with JML, and Dafny for C#. The pipeline integrates abstract syntax tree parsing with seman-tic embeddings derived from models such as SentenceTransformer and CodeBERT. This enables the generation of graph representations that capture both structural relationships and semantic context. Our results show that consistent graph representations can be constructed across different languages and annotation styles. This work provides a practi-cal basis for future steps in semantic enrichment and approximate graph matching for scalable verification artefact reuse. 

Keywords: Graph Construction, Graph Matching, Language Syntax Tree Parsing, Large Language Models 

# 1 Introduction 

Reusing verification artefacts such as specifications, contracts, and proofs re-mains a challenging task in software verification. Although large repositories of such artefacts exist, their reuse is still largely manual. Developers must search for relevant artefacts and adapt them to new contexts, even when similar solutions already exist. This process is difficult because artefacts often differ in syntax, abstraction level, and domain-specific vocabulary. In our long-term research vi-sion, we identified reuse as a key problem that requires principled mechanisms for discovering semantic correspondences between artefacts. Rather than generat-ing new artefacts, the focus is on identifying structural and semantic similarities across existing ones. This can be understood as a problem of semantic matching under partial equivalence, where only fragments of behaviour or intent may align across different implementations. To address this, we proposed representing verification artefacts as typed, at-tributed graphs. In this representation, nodes capture semantic elements such  

> arXiv:2604.26578v1 [cs.SE] 29 Apr 2026 2A. Beg and D. O’Donoghue and R. Monahan

Fig. 1: Workflow for verification artefact reuse via hybrid graph matching and LLM-based semantic enrichment. Verification artefacts are transformed into structured graphs, enriched with semantic embeddings derived from large lan-guage model (in our work, we used BERT model i.e. SentenceTransformer /all-MiniLM-L6-v2, CodeBERT and Graph Neural Netowrk(GNN)), and matched approximately using both structural and semantic similarity. Retrieved artefacts are either directly reused to complete verification or adapted through graph-based refinement. as variables, predicates, transitions, and proof obligations, while edges encode relationships such as control-flow, dataflow, and logical dependencies. This ab-straction allows programs, specifications, and proofs to be treated uniformly, enabling comparison across heterogeneous artefacts. However, graph structure alone is not sufficient. Important semantic information is also embedded in iden-tifiers, comments, and logical expressions. To capture this, large language models (LLMs) can be used to generate embeddings that enrich graph nodes with se-mantic information. These embeddings allow the system to identify similarities that are not visible at the structural level. In this paper, we focus on the first stage of this broader vision: graph con-struction for verification artefacts. We implement and evaluate a pipeline that translates imperative programs into typed, attributed graphs, forming the foun-dation for subsequent semantic enrichment and matching. The overall workflow, illustrated in Figure 1, outlines how graph construction integrates with LLM-based enrichment and approximate graph matching to support artefact reuse. 

Syntatical Differences: There are syntactical differences between annotations in 

OpenJML , ACSL , and Dafny , even though they often serve similar purposes (e.g., specifying preconditions, postconditions, and invariants). Below is a comparative overview of their syntactic styles. Graph Construction and Matching for Imperative Programs 3

OpenJML (Java + JML): OpenJML is based on Java and uses annotations embedded in special comments (e.g., //\@ or /*\@ …@*/ ). Specifications closely resemble Java syntax. 

//@ requires x > 0; //@ ensures \result == x + 1; public int increment(int x) { return x + 1; }

It employs backslash-prefixed keywords such as \result , \old , \forall , and 

\exists .

ACSL (ANSI/ISO C Specification Language): ACSL is designed for annotating C programs. It uses block comments ( /*\@ …*/ ) and line comments ( //\@ ) for specifications. Its syntax is more mathematical, with some overlap with JML but adapted to C semantics. 

/*@ requires x > 0; ensures \result == x + 1; */ int increment(int x) { return x + 1; }

Like JML, ACSL uses \result , \old , \forall , and \exists , but includes C-specific typing and memory modeling. 

Dafny: Dafny is a programming language designed with built-in support for specification and verification. Specifications are integrated directly into the lan-guage, eliminating the need for annotation comments. 

method increment(x: int) returns (r: int) requires x > 0 ensures r == x + 1 {r := x + 1; }

It uses native keywords such as requires , ensures , assert , assume , and 

invariant , and supports tight integration with SMT solvers and functional-style proofs. Table 1 summarises the syntactical differences of the three notations. 

Key Contributions. 

– We present a unified, end-to-end pipeline for graph construction and match-ing of imperative programs across multiple languages, including C, Java, and C#, along with their specification frameworks (ACSL, JML, and Dafny). 4 A. Beg and D. O’Donoghue and R. Monahan                         

> Feature OpenJML ACSL Dafny
> Annotation style //\@ ,/*\@ …@*/ //\@ ,/*\@ …*/ Native keywords Result keyword \result \result Variable in signature Quantifiers \forall ,\exists \forall ,\exists forall ,exists
> Old value \old (·)\old (·)old (·)
> Scope Java-like class/method C-like function/global Dafny methods/functions Spec location Comments Comments Inline in code

Table 1: Comparison of syntactical features in OpenJML, ACSL, and Dafny. 

– We design and implement automated, rule-based transformations to generate specification-augmented datasets (C–ACSL, Java–JML, and C#–Dafny). 

– We develop graph construction techniques that encode both program struc-ture and formal specifications as typed, attributed graphs using AST-based and pattern-driven approaches. 

– We integrate neural semantic representations using transformer-based mod-els (SentenceTransformer and CodeBERT) to enrich graph nodes and enable similarity-based matching. 

– We demonstrate the feasibility of cross-language artefact matching through embedding-based similarity, providing a foundation for scalable verification artefact reuse. The structure of the paper is as follows: Section 2 presents the related work. Section 3 comprises three subsections: the experimental setup, which explains dataset selection, virtual environment settings and the research workflow. Section 4 explains in detail the implementation of graph construction and matching for imperative programs. Section 5 concludes the paper, with a focused subsection 5.1 on lessons learned. 

# 2 Related Work 

In [3], we presented a long term research agenda, named as Learning Infused Formal Reasoning (LIFR), having three dimensions: contract synthesis, verifi-cation artefact reuse and semantic foundations. Our paper addresses the second dimension. The workflow illustrated in Figure 1 is a consolidated one, available in [3]. It outlines how graph construction integrates with LLM-based enrich-ment and approximate graph matching to support artefact reuse. The summary of research agenda is also represented in [4]. Early work on graph-based representations of programs and specifications demonstrated the potential for reuse through structural similarity. The Aris system [10] generated graph representations of source code combined with for-mal specifications, enabling the propagation of specifications to new implemen-tations with similar structures [9]. This approach was further explored in [1], where specification transfer was achieved within a single iteration for similar Graph Construction and Matching for Imperative Programs 5

implementations. Graph-based similarity has also been applied beyond software artefacts. The Dr Inventor system [8] used graph representations to identify la-tent similarities between research publications, supporting the transfer of ideas across domains. However, these approaches primarily demonstrated feasibility and were not evaluated as large-scale, robust systems. More recent work in knowledge-graph alignment and schema matching pro-vides stronger empirical evidence for combining structural and semantic meth-ods. Systems such as WES+pArtLink [6] and RAG-augmented table-to-knowledge-graph alignment [14] show that LLM guidance improves both coverage and pre-cision when used alongside structural retrieval. The KG-RAG4SM system [7] further demonstrates that grounding LLM reasoning in retrieved graph struc-tures reduces hallucination by constraining the search space. Similar ideas have been explored in software engineering and ontology pipelines. Code-graph–based retrieval augmented with LLMs [2] shows that LLMs are effective when operating over structured representations. Likewise, ontology-driven natural-language–to– SPARQL systems [13] demonstrate how structured knowledge can guide LLM interpretation. Studies in cultural-heritage knowledge graphs [15] also report that hybrid approaches combining symbolic structure with LLM-based seman-tics outperform purely symbolic or purely neural methods. Graph transformation techniques are also relevant for artefact reuse. Once correspondences between artefacts are identified, adaptation is required to fit new contexts. Graph rewriting provides a formal mechanism for expressing such changes, including insertions, deletions, and refinements, while preserving se-mantic properties [11]. These techniques offer a principled way to modify verifi-cation artefacts after matching. We can draw a conclusion from literature that LLMs within iterative reasoning pipelines is becoming common. Frameworks such as LangChain [12] and AutoGPT support retrieval-augmented generation and multi-step reasoning, often combining multiple LLMs. These systems high-light the growing importance of integrating LLMs with structured workflows, which aligns with the hybrid approach explored in this work. 

# 3 Methodology 

3.1 Experiment Setup 

GitHub Repository: To make our work publicly accessible, the artifacts are available at our GitHub repository: https://github .com/arshadbeg/Graphs-Construction-Matching-TechnicalReport. 

Dataset: A benchmark comprising fifty-six (56) C programs, each demonstrat-ing varying levels of structural complexity, was used without modification from a publicly available GitHub repository 1 originally employed for prompt engineer-ing in [5]. Consistent with the original design, these programs were organized   

> 1https://github .com/ggranberry/intent_dataset 6A. Beg and D. O’Donoghue and R. Monahan

into three predefined categories: (i) correct implementations, (ii) implementa-tions showing clear differences between function variants, and (iii) implemen-tations containing subtle differences within their function bodies. Each of the fifty-six base programs was examined across all three categories, resulting in a total of 168 evaluated instances. This structured categorization supports a systematic analysis of tool behavior across a controlled range of semantic and syntactic variations. The required experiment setup and graph construction and matching is executed within a Linux environment running on Windows Subsys-tem for Linux (WSL 2), hosted on a Windows 11 system equipped with an Intel Core Ultra 5 125U processor (3.60 GHz) and 32 GB of RAM (31.5 GB usable) operating under a 64-bit architecture. 

Virtual Environment Settings: To support the graph-based analysis con-ducted in this work, we configured an isolated Python environment using venv .All dependencies were installed locally within the environment, ensuring isolation from system-level packages and consistent execution across experiments. The installed libraries reside in the site-packages directory of the virtual environ-ment, comprising a diverse stack including program analysis tools (e.g., clang ,

javalang ), graph processing libraries (e.g., networkx , torch_geometric ), and machine learning frameworks (e.g., torch , transformers , scikit-learn ). Ad-ditional numerical and symbolic computation support is provided by packages such as numpy , scipy , and sympy .

3.2 Workflow 

This work follows a multi-stage pipeline designed to support graph-based repre-sentation and matching of imperative programs across multiple languages and specification frameworks. The overall workflow begins with a unified C dataset, which serves as the base artefact collection. From this dataset, multiple language-specific and specification-augmented variants are systematically generated, in-cluding C with ACSL annotations, Java with JML specifications, C# transla-tions, and Dafny-augmented C# programs. Each transformation stage is im-plemented using rule-based Python scripts that ensure structural consistency while adapting syntax and specification formats to the target language. The overall workflow of the proposed approach is illustrated in Figure 2, which sum-marizes the complete pipeline from dataset generation to graph-based match-ing. It highlights how C programs are systematically transformed into multiple specification-augmented representations, followed by graph construction, seman-tic embedding, and similarity-based artefact retrieval. Once the multi-language dataset is constructed, each program is processed through a graph construction pipeline. This step converts source code into typed, attributed graphs using AST-based parsing techniques (or regex-guided struc-ture extraction where full parsing is not available). For C, Java, and Dafny representations, control-flow constructs, specifications, and program statements are encoded as nodes and edges within directed graphs using networkx . In paral-lel, specification elements such as ACSL contracts, JML annotations, and Dafny Graph Construction and Matching for Imperative Programs 7C Dataset (Base Programs) Multi-Language Generation: C-ACSL, Java-JML, C#, Dafny Graph Construction: AST + Spec Injection (NetworkX) Semantic Encoding: SentenceTransformer / CodeBERT Embedding Similarity: Cosine Matching Matched Artefacts: Retrieval Results 

Fig. 2: End-to-end workflow for graph construction and matching across C, Java, and Dafny pipelines with specification-aware transformations and neural embedding-based similarity. invariants are explicitly injected into the graph structure, ensuring that formal semantics are preserved alongside program structure. The next stage involves semantic enrichment and representation learning. Each constructed graph is linearized into textual form and encoded using transformer-based models such as SentenceTransformer (for C, Java, and C# pipelines) and CodeBERT (for Dafny). These embeddings capture both syntactic patterns and latent semantic meaning across code and specifications. The resulting vectors are stored alongside graph structures to enable unified structural-semantic analysis. Finally, pairwise similarity computation is performed using cosine similar-ity over embedding spaces to enable graph matching across artefacts. This al-lows identification of structurally and semantically similar programs across lan-guages and specification levels. The complete workflow supports systematic arte-fact comparison, retrieval, and reuse, forming the basis for scalable verification-oriented program analysis. 

# 4 Graph Construction and Matching 

4.1 ACSL annotations generation for C Programs 

Python script to automatically augment C programs with ACSL (ANSI/ISO C Specification Language) annotations is generated through GPT-5.2, guided by a 8 A. Beg and D. O’Donoghue and R. Monahan 

prompt (see Fig. 3). The resulting script (267 lines) generates ACSL specifica-tions from input C code. At the function level, conditional return patterns are identified, producing postconditions of the form: 

ensures (C) ⇒ \ result = E1

ensures ¬(C) ⇒ \ result = E2

where C is the branch condition and E1, E2 are returned expressions.      

> Prompt
> Generate a Python script that processes clean C files and produces precise ACSL annotations based on code semantics. It should analyze functions (excluding main ), capture control flow, conditionals, loops, and data usage, and generate meaningful requires ,assigns , and ensures clauses. It must handle compound conditions, include loop invariants, support quantified expressions for arrays, and produce valid, non-redundant annotations in-serted appropriately.

Fig. 3: Prompt used to guide GPT-5.2 for ACSL annotation generation. For loop constructs ( for , while , do ), heuristic rules infer loop indices, bounds, and array accesses. Preconditions ensure valid memory access and bounds, while invariants constrain index ranges and express array properties using quanti-fied expressions. Termination is enforced via decreasing variants. Switch-case constructs are translated into conditional postconditions linking case labels to returned values. At the main function, runtime assertions are inserted after func-tion calls based on simple argument properties, providing lightweight correctness checks. 

4.2 Graph Construction for C Programs with ACSL annotations 

The graph construction and matching pipeline is implemented in Python and follows a modular, end-to-end design. It integrates standard libraries such as 

os and json for file handling and data storage, along with networkx for graph representation and numpy for numerical computation. For parsing source code, the pipeline uses clang.cindex , configured with libclang , to extract abstract syntax trees (ASTs) from C programs. In addition, semantic representations are generated using the SentenceTransformer library with the all-MiniLM-L6-v2 

model. The pipeline is structured into distinct stages: graph construction, em-bedding generation, and similarity-based matching, ensuring a clear separation between structural and semantic processing. Graph construction is performed by traversing the AST produced by Clang. Each node in the AST is converted into a node in a directed graph using Graph Construction and Matching for Imperative Programs 9

networkx.DiGraph , where node attributes capture the type and textual con-tent of the original AST element. Unique identifiers are generated using node metadata such as kind, line, and column information. Parent-child relationships in the AST are preserved as directed edges labeled AST_CHILD , ensuring that the hierarchical program structure is retained. The resulting graphs are serialized in GraphML format using networkx.write_graphml , allowing interoperability and further analysis. This stage captures the structural backbone of programs in a uniform and language-aware representation. 

Generated GraphML Files: The generated GraphML representation encodes the program structure as a directed, labelled graph in which each node corresponds to a syntactic construct derived from the program’s abstract syntax tree (AST). Each <node> element is uniquely identified by an id attribute that typically combines the node type, source location (e.g., line and column), and an internal identifier to ensure uniqueness. The semantic role of a node is captured ￿￿￿￿￿￿￿ 

<data> elements: the key d0 denotes the syntactic category (e.g., DECL_STMT ,

VAR_DECL , BINARY_OPERATOR ), while d1 stores an associated label such as a vari-able name (e.g., i, low ) or repeats the operator/type when no explicit identi-fier exists. For instance, a declaration statement node ( DECL_STMT ) is linked to a variable declaration node ( VAR_DECL ) representing i, while expression nodes such as BINARY_OPERATOR and DECL_REF_EXPR capture the structure of expres-sions involving program variables. This hierarchical organisation, complemented by edges (not shown here) representing parent–child relationships, enables the graph to faithfully model both control and data-relevant syntactic constructs of the original program. Semantic enrichment is achieved by transforming graph content into textual form and generating embeddings. Node-level textual attributes are aggregated into a single sequence using a simple traversal strategy. This text is then passed to the SentenceTransformer model to produce dense vector embeddings. A fallback mechanism ensures stability by assigning a zero vector when no tex-tual content is available. The embeddings are converted into standard Python float representations to avoid datatype inconsistencies and stored in JSON for-mat. This step introduces semantic information that complements the struc-tural graph, enabling comparisons beyond syntactic similarity. Figure 4 show the graph constructed for quicksort and merge programs. Graph matching is performed using pairwise similarity computation over the generated embeddings. The pipeline applies cosine similarity, implemented with numpy , to measure the closeness between embedding vectors. All program pairs are compared in a systematic manner, and similarity scores are recorded alongside file paths. The results are stored as structured JSON data, enabling downstream retrieval and analysis. The overall pipeline orchestrates these steps through directory traversal using os.walk , ensuring scalability across datasets. This combination of AST-based graph construction, transformer-based embed-dings, and numerical similarity provides a practical foundation for approximate graph matching in verification artefact reuse. 10 A. Beg and D. O’Donoghue and R. Monahan 

Fig. 4: Graphs constructed for ACSL annotated C Programs of quicksort and merge 

Discussion on output matches.JSON file The similarity results captured in the matches.json file represent a comprehensive pairwise graph-matching out-put where each C source file from the ACSL dataset is compared against every other file to quantify structural and semantic resemblance. Each JSON entry consists of two file paths (file1 and file2) and a corresponding cosine-based sim-ilarity score derived from their learned graph embeddings. The values span a broad spectrum, typically ranging from low similarity (￿0.35–0.60), indicating weak structural correspondence between unrelated algorithms (e.g., search versus cryptographic or hashing routines), to moderate similarity (￿0.60–0.80), where programs share partial algorithmic patterns such as loops, conditional logic, or common data-handling constructs. At the higher end (￿0.80–0.95), the matched pairs reflect strong semantic alignment, often occurring between variants of the same algorithm or closely related implementations such as sorting, searching, or numerical utility functions. These high-scoring pairs indicate that the graph rep-resentations successfully capture deeper syntactic and structural features beyond surface-level token similarity. A particularly important aspect of this output format is its global compa-rability, where a single reference file (e.g., binarysearch.c) is evaluated against all other programs in the dataset, producing a ranked similarity distribution that reflects both near-duplicates and functionally related implementations. This dense comparison structure enables fine-grained clustering of programs into logi-cal families, such as “basic,” “famous,” “mirror,” and “unique” categories, as well as cross-category relationships where algorithmic overlap exists despite differing contexts. The JSON structure thus serves not only as a storage format but also as an analytical artifact for downstream tasks such as plagiarism detection, code retrieval, and semantic clustering. Finally, the distribution of similarity scores highlights the discriminative ca-pability of the underlying graph embedding model: low scores consistently cor-respond to semantically divergent programs, while high scores correctly surface algorithmic equivalence even across stylistically different implementations. In-Graph Construction and Matching for Imperative Programs 11 

termediate values capture partial structural overlap, such as shared control-flow constructs or similar loop nesting patterns, which are common in algorithmic variations like sorting, searching, or array manipulation. Collectively, this sim-ilarity matrix forms a weighted relational map over the dataset, enabling both qualitative inspection of program relationships and quantitative evaluation of structural similarity across the ACSL corpus. 

4.3 Java Files Dataset 

The Java files dataset used in our experiments is systematically generated from the original C dataset. This ensures consistency across languages while preserv-ing the structural characteristics of the source programs. The transformation is implemented as a Python-based pipeline that processes each C file and produces a corresponding Java version. The script relies on standard libraries such as os 

for directory traversal and file handling, and re for regular expression–based pat-tern matching. As an initial step, the pipeline removes C-specific preprocessor directives (e.g., #include , #define ) to ensure compatibility with Java syntax. This is followed by type normalization, where C types such as pointers to char 

are mapped to Java String , while primitive types are preserved where possible. The core transformation operates through a sequence of rule-based conver-sions applied line by line. Input/output constructs are adapted by convert-ing printf statements into System.out.println calls and scanf statements into Scanner -based input handling. Function signatures are rewritten to match Java conventions, including transforming the main function into public static void main(String[] args) . Additionally, C struct definitions are translated into static inner Java classes, with fields extracted and converted using the same type-mapping rules. Function definitions are converted into static Java methods by parsing return types and parameters, ensuring that method signatures remain consistent with the original program logic. Finally, each transformed program is wrapped within a Java class, with nec-essary imports such as java.util.* and a shared Scanner instance for input handling. The script preserves the relative directory structure of the original dataset using os.path.relpath , enabling traceability between C and Java ver-sions. Output files are generated with sanitized class names to ensure validity in Java. The entire dataset is processed recursively using os.walk , allowing scalable conversion across large collections of programs. This automated transformation provides a consistent multi-language dataset, enabling comparative analysis and supporting downstream tasks such as graph construction and matching. 

4.4 JML Generation 

The JML generation pipeline operates on the Java dataset produced earlier and automatically augments each file with formal specifications. It is implemented in Python using standard libraries such as os for directory traversal and file man-agement, re for pattern-based parsing, and typing for structured data handling. The pipeline begins by identifying valid Java files through simple filtering rules 12 A. Beg and D. O’Donoghue and R. Monahan 

that exclude any residual C/C++ preprocessing directives. Additional cleaning ensures that such directives are removed if present, maintaining syntactic cor-rectness. File discovery is handled recursively using os.walk , and utility func-tions manage reading and writing while preserving the directory structure of the dataset. The core of the approach relies on regular expressions to extract structural elements from Java code. Patterns are defined for detecting classes, methods, and fields, enabling lightweight static analysis without requiring a full parser. Field extraction is used to generate class-level invariants, where heuristic rules assign constraints based on data types. For example, numeric fields are constrained to be non-negative, boolean fields are restricted to valid truth values, and reference types are required to be non-null. These invariants are inserted immediately after class declarations, ensuring that global properties of the program state are explicitly captured. Method-level specifications are generated by analyzing parameter lists and return types. For each method, requires clauses enforce non-null conditions on parameters, while ensures clauses specify basic guarantees about return values when applicable. An assignable clause is also included to indicate permissible state modifications. These contracts are inserted directly above method declara-tions, preserving readability and structure. The overall transformation is applied consistently across all files, producing a JML-annotated dataset that retains the original program logic while introducing lightweight formal specifications suit-able for further analysis and verification tasks. 

4.5 Graph Construction and Matching for JML augmented Java Files 

The graph construction process for JML-augmented Java files is tailored to cap-ture both program structure and embedded specifications in a unified represen-tation. Instead of relying on compiler bindings, the pipeline uses the javalang 

library to parse Java source code into an abstract syntax tree. This choice en-ables lightweight and language-specific parsing directly within Python. The AST is traversed recursively, and each syntactic element is mapped into a node within a directed graph using networkx . Node attributes store both the structural type (e.g., class, method, expression) and a textual label derived from identifiers or values. A distinctive aspect of this pipeline is the explicit extraction of JML annotations from comments using regular expressions. Since JML specifications are not part of the standard AST, they are injected as separate nodes and linked to the file-level node via dedicated edges. This design ensures that formal specifi-cations are preserved and made available alongside structural program elements within the same graph. Figure 5 show the graph constructed for quicksort and merge programs. For matching, the pipeline combines this enriched graph representation with semantic encoding techniques. All node-level textual content, including JML an-notations, is aggregated and transformed into dense vector embeddings using the Graph Construction and Matching for Imperative Programs 13 

Fig. 5: Graphs constructed for JML annotated Java Programs of quicksort and merge 

SentenceTransformer model. These embeddings provide a compact represen-tation of both code semantics and specification intent. Similarity between Java artefacts is then computed using cosine similarity implemented with numpy , al-lowing efficient pairwise comparison across the dataset. The resulting similarity scores reflect not only structural resemblance but also alignment in specification-level intent, which is particularly important for JML-annotated programs. By integrating extracted specifications directly into the graph and embedding space, the pipeline supports a more expressive form of matching that goes beyond pure code structure. 

Discussion on output matches.JSON file The Java–JML graph matching results are stored in a structured JSON format where each entry corresponds to a pair-wise comparison between two source files along with their computed similarity score. Each record contains the fields file1, file2, and a normalized similarity value in the range [0, 1], capturing the degree of structural and behavioral align-ment between Java implementations annotated with JML specifications. For instance, comparisons involving duplicate.java against a range of basic algorith-mic programs such as sorting, searching, and numerical utilities show moderate to high similarity values, typically ranging from approximately 0.66 to 0.88, reflecting shared control-flow patterns and reusable logic structures. Higher sim-ilarity scores (above 0.85) are observed for closely related transformations or near-identical implementations, while lower values (around 0.60–0.70) indicate weaker structural correspondence, often due to differing algorithmic strategies or specification constraints introduced by JML annotations. Across the broader dataset, spanning correct, obvious, and subtle variants, as well as categories like mirror, famous, and unique, the similarity distribution remains diverse but consistent with expected semantic proximity. Near-identical program pairs, such as intentionally duplicated or minimally altered variants, achieve scores close to 1.0, whereas algorithmically distinct programs such as 14 A. Beg and D. O’Donoghue and R. Monahan 

search versus cryptographic or hashing routines fall toward the lower bound of the spectrum. This graded distribution demonstrates that the matching pro-cess effectively captures both syntactic and specification-driven similarities in-troduced through JML, while also distinguishing semantically different imple-mentations even when they share superficial structural patterns. 

4.6 CSharp Files Generation 

The generation of C# files from the original C dataset is carried out using a Python-based rule-driven transformation pipeline that systematically maps C constructs into their closest C# equivalents while preserving the overall program structure. The script uses standard libraries such as os for directory traversal and file management, and re for regular expression–based parsing and rewriting. The process begins by iterating through all C source files in the dataset and reading their contents line by line. Key syntactic elements are then transformed using targeted conversion functions: C header inclusions such as #include <stdio.h> 

are replaced with using System; , while input/output operations are adapted by converting printf into Console.WriteLine and scanf into appropriate 

Console.ReadLine() parsing expressions based on type. Functionality is pre-served by converting the main function into the C# entry point static void Main(string[] args) , and by mapping C data types to their C# counterparts, including pointer-to-string conversions. Structural elements are also handled: 

struct definitions are rewritten into C# struct blocks with field declarations, and function definitions are translated into static methods with properly recon-structed parameter lists. Loop constructs are largely retained due to syntactic similarity between the languages. The transformed code is then wrapped with necessary boilerplate, written to corresponding .cs files while preserving the original directory hierarchy, and generated at scale using recursive traversal via 

os.walk , resulting in a consistent multi-language dataset aligned with the orig-inal C programs. 

4.7 Dafny Generation 

The generation of Dafny programs from the C# dataset is achieved through a Python-based transformation that focuses on extracting behavioral structure and expressing it in a verification-oriented form. The script uses os for directory traversal and re for structured pattern matching, enabling it to identify method definitions, control-flow constructs, and return statements within C# code. In-stead of performing full parsing, the approach relies on carefully designed regular expressions to detect method signatures, conditional statements, and loops. For each method, the body is isolated using a bracket-matching routine, allowing the script to analyze internal logic in a localized manner. Parameters are extracted and simplified into Dafny-compatible types, while return types are normalized to align with Dafny’s method syntax. This selective extraction ensures that key computational behavior is preserved while avoiding unnecessary syntactic com-plexity from the source language. Graph Construction and Matching for Imperative Programs 15 

The transformation emphasizes capturing logical intent rather than syntactic fidelity. Conditional return patterns are analyzed to derive ensures clauses, ex-pressing relationships between input conditions and returned values in Dafny’s specification language. When both if and else branches yield return values, the script generates dual postconditions reflecting these cases. Additionally, loop constructs are examined to infer basic invariants and termination measures, such as bounds on iteration variables and decreasing variants, which are essential for verification in Dafny. The resulting output consists of standalone Dafny methods that mirror the control-flow semantics of the original C# code while embedding formal specifications. Files are generated in a mirrored directory structure, ensur-ing traceability across representations and enabling their direct use in verification workflows. 

4.8 Graph Construction and Matching from Dafny augmented CSharp Files 

The graph construction process for Dafny programs is designed to explicitly cap-ture both executable structure and formal specifications within a unified repre-sentation. The pipeline is implemented in Python using os for dataset traversal, 

re for pattern extraction, and networkx for graph modeling. Instead of rely-ing on a full parser, the approach uses carefully defined regular expressions to identify Dafny constructs such as methods, functions, and their associated specifications. Each file is represented as a root node, from which method-level nodes are created. These nodes are enriched with textual labels that include method names and parameters. The body of each method is isolated using a bracket-aware extraction routine, allowing the script to systematically process statements. Specification elements such as requires , ensures , invariants, and assertions are explicitly extracted and represented as dedicated nodes connected to their corresponding method nodes. This ensures that both program logic and verification conditions are preserved within the same structural graph. Within method bodies, the pipeline incrementally builds a hierarchical struc-ture of statements and control-flow elements. Statements are decomposed using simple splitting rules, and each is represented as a node with associated tex-tual content. Control-flow constructs such as if conditions and while loops are identified using regular expressions and expanded into specialized nodes cap-turing their conditions. Return expressions are similarly extracted and linked, while loop invariants and assertions are embedded as child nodes of relevant statements. This layered representation allows the graph to reflect not only syn-tactic organization but also the logical structure of Dafny programs. Unique identifiers are assigned to each node to maintain consistency, and edges labeled 

AST_CHILD preserve parent-child relationships. The resulting graphs are serial-ized in GraphML format, enabling reuse in downstream analysis. For matching, the pipeline combines this structured representation with deep semantic encoding using CodeBERT. Node-level textual content is aggregated into a single sequence, which is then tokenized using transformers.AutoTokenizer 

and processed by AutoModel from the HuggingFace library. The model runs on 16 A. Beg and D. O’Donoghue and R. Monahan 

either CPU or GPU via torch , depending on availability, and produces contex-tual embeddings from which the [CLS] token is used as a compact representation of the entire graph. These embeddings, stored as numerical vectors, capture both code semantics and specification intent. Pairwise similarity between Dafny pro-grams is computed using cosine similarity implemented with numpy , enabling systematic comparison across the dataset. The final output records similarity scores between program pairs, supporting artefact retrieval and alignment based on both structural and semantic characteristics. 

Discussion on output matches.JSON file We summarize similarity results for Dafny implementations anchored on quicksort.dfy, which shows consistently very high structural similarity across the dataset. Most comparisons across correct, obvious, and subtle variants, as well as mirror, unique, and famous categories, cluster tightly in the 0.95–1.00 range, indicating strong semantic and syntactic overlap despite naming or structural variations. High scores with programs like reverse, rotate, sorted, kmp, levenshtein, and voting suggest shared algorith-mic patterns and reusable verification scaffolding typical in Dafny codebases. Mirror and unique transformations preserve logical structure while renaming or reshaping control flow, keeping similarity high. A notable outlier is insert.dfy with near-zero similarity, likely reflecting a fundamentally different algorithmic structure. Overall, the data indicates that quicksort serves as a strong template or hub implementation, with most files exhibiting near-duplicate verified logic and consistent specification-driven design across categories and experimental variants across both verified and experimental subsets of the benchmark. 

# 5 Conclusion 

This paper presented a unified approach to graph construction and matching for imperative programs using both structural and neural representations. We focused on building consistent graph abstractions across multiple programming languages and specification styles, including C with ACSL, Java with JML, and C# with Dafny. For each setting, we developed automated pipelines that trans-form source programs and their annotations into typed, attributed graphs. These graphs preserve key program elements such as control flow, data usage, and spec-ification constructs, enabling a common representation across otherwise hetero-geneous artefacts. The results show that it is feasible to systematically construct comparable graph structures from diverse language ecosystems while retaining both syntactic and semantic information. A key contribution of this work lies in demonstrating how specification-aware graph construction can be integrated with embedding-based represen-tations. By incorporating annotations such as ACSL contracts, JML specifica-tions, and Dafny invariants directly into graph structures, the approach captures not only program behavior but also intended correctness properties. The use of transformer-based models, including SentenceTransformer and CodeBERT, further enables semantic enrichment of these graphs, allowing similarity to be Graph Construction and Matching for Imperative Programs 17 

assessed beyond surface-level structure. This combination supports more expres-sive matching, where both structural alignment and specification intent con-tribute to identifying related artefacts across datasets. Overall, the work establishes a practical foundation for scalable verification artefact reuse through graph-based representations. While the current study focuses on graph construction and similarity computation, it opens the way for deeper integration with approximate graph matching and adaptation techniques. Future work will explore alignment strategies that combine structural constraints with semantic similarity, as well as mechanisms for transforming matched arte-facts across languages and abstraction levels. By bridging program structure, formal specifications, and neural representations, this research contributes to-ward a broader vision of automated and reusable verification workflows. 

5.1 Discussion 

While the proposed pipeline demonstrates the feasibility of constructing and matching graph-based representations across multiple programming languages and specification frameworks, several limitations remain. First, the transforma-tion stages rely heavily on rule-based and regex-driven extraction rather than full semantic parsing. This design choice improves scalability and simplicity but can introduce brittleness when encountering complex or non-standard code pat-terns. As a result, certain edge cases in control flow or deeply nested constructs may not be accurately captured in the graph representation. Second, the qual-ity of semantic matching is strongly dependent on the embedding models used (SentenceTransformer and CodeBERT). Although these models provide useful general-purpose representations, they are not specifically trained for formal ver-ification artefacts or specification-heavy code. This can lead to reduced sensi-tivity in distinguishing fine-grained semantic differences, particularly when two programs share similar structure but differ in specification intent. Additionally, cosine similarity over global embeddings may oversimplify richer structural re-lationships encoded in graphs. From a practical perspective, we also observed that specification injection (ACSL, JML, and Dafny) improves expressiveness but introduces heterogeneity in representation density across datasets. This affects comparability and may bias matching toward specification-rich files. Furthermore, the pipeline assumes consistent formatting across generated datasets, which may not always hold in real-world codebases. These observations highlight the need for more robust parsing mechanisms and domain-adapted embedding models. Despite these lim-itations, several important lessons were learned. A key insight is that separat-ing structural graph construction from semantic embedding significantly im-proves modularity and extensibility of the pipeline. Another lesson is that even lightweight, rule-based specification extraction can substantially enhance down-stream matching performance when combined with neural representations. Fi-nally, the experiments reinforce the importance of integrating symbolic structure (graphs) with learned representations, as neither approach alone is sufficient for reliable cross-language artefact matching. These findings provide a foundation for future work on more precise, semantics-aware graph learning frameworks for program verification artefacts. 

# Use of AI-Assisted Tools 

We acknowledge the use of free version of GPT-5.2 for refining the textual pre-sentation of the paper. The model was applied to improve clarity and coherence. Followed by this, the text has been thoroughly reviewed and discussed by all authors to ensure accuracy and integrity. 

# Acknowledgement 

This work has been supported by the European Commission as part of the ADAPT Centre for Digital Content Technology which is funded under the SFI Research Centres Programme (Grant 13/RC/2106) and is co-funded under the European Regional Development Fund. 

# Bibliography 

[1] Ajankovil KG, O’Donoghue D, Monahan R (2021) Creating new program proofs by combining abductive and deductive reasoning. In: International Conference on Computational Creativity (ICCC) [2] Ali SJ, Naganathan V, Bork D (2024) Establishing traceability between natural language requirements and software artifacts by combining RAG and llms. In: Maass W, Han H, Yasar H, Multari NJ (eds) Conceptual Modeling - 43rd International Conference, ER 2024, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, October 28-31, 2024, Proceedings, Springer, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 15238, pp 295–314, DOI 10 .1007/978-3-031-75872-0 \_16, URL https://doi .org/10 .1007/978-3-031-75872-0_16 [3] Beg A, O’Donoghue D, Monahan R (2026) Learning-infused formal reason-ing: From contract synthesis to artifact reuse and formal semantics. URL https://arxiv .org/abs/2602 .02881, vERIFAI-2026: The Interplay between Artificial Intelligence and Software Verification, LASER Center, Villebru-mier, France, March 8–11, 2026, 2602 .02881 [4] Beg A, O’Donoghue D, Monahan R (2026) Short version of verifai2026 paper – learning infused formal reasoning: Contract synthesis, artefact reuse and semantic foundations. URL https://arxiv .org/abs/2604 .12747, accepted at AASC-2026: ADAPT Annual Scientific Conference 2026, Dublin City Uni-versity, Ireland, May 14, 2026, 2604 .12747 [5] Granberry G, Ahrendt W, Johansson M (2025) Specify what? enhanc-ing neural specification synthesis by symbolic methods. In: Kosmatov N, Graph Construction and Matching for Imperative Programs 19 

Kovács L (eds) Integrated Formal Methods, Springer Nature Switzerland, Cham, pp 307–325 [6] Lippolis AS, Klironomos A, Milon-Flores DF, Zheng H, Jouglar A, Norouzi E, Hogan A (2023) Enhancing entity alignment between wikidata and art-graph using llms. In: Bikakis A, Ferrario R, Jean S, Markhoff B, Mosca A, Asmundo MN (eds) Proceedings of the International Workshop on Se-mantic Web and Ontology Design for Cultural Heritage co-located with the International Semantic Web Conference 2023 (ISWC 2023), Athens, Greece, November 7, 2023, CEUR-WS.org, CEUR Workshop Proceedings, vol 3540, URL https://ceur-ws .org/Vol-3540/paper7 .pdf [7] Ma C, Chakrabarti S, Khan A, Molnár B (2025) Knowledge graph-based retrieval-augmented generation for schema matching. CoRR abs/2501.08686, DOI 10 .48550/ARXIV .2501 .08686, URL https://doi .org/ 10 .48550/arXiv .2501 .08686, 2501 .08686 [8] O’Donoghue D, Abgaz Y, Hurley D, Ronzano F (2015) Stimulating and sim-ulating creativity with dr inventor. In: International Conference on Com-putational Creativity (ICCC), Brigham Young University, USA [9] O’Donoghue D, Monahan R, Grijincu D, Pitu M, Halim F, Rahman F, Abgaz Y, Hurley D (2014) Creating formal specifications with analogical reasoning. In: PICS-Publication Series of the Institute of Cognitive Science, Institute of Cognitive Science, vol 1 [10] Pitu M, Grijincu D, Li P, Saleem A, Monahan R, O’Donoghue D (2013) Arís: Analogical reasoning for reuse of implementation & specification. In: Proceedings Artificial Intelligence for Formal Methods (AI4FM), Depart-ment of Computer Science, Heriot-Watt University [11] Strecker M (2007) Modeling and verifying graph transformations in proof assistants. In: Mackie I, Plump D (eds) Proceedings of the Fourth In-ternational Workshop on Computing with Terms and Graphs, TER-MGRAPH@ETAPS 2007, Braga, Portugal, March 31, 2007, Elsevier, Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, vol 203, pp 135– 148, DOI 10 .1016/J .ENTCS .2008 .03 .039, URL https://doi .org/10 .1016/ j.entcs .2008 .03 .039 [12] Topsakal O, Akinci TC (2023) Creating large language model applications utilizing langchain: A primer on developing llm apps fast. In: International conference on applied engineering and natural sciences, vol 1, pp 1050–1056 [13] Tufek N, Thuluva AS, Just VP, Ekaputra FJ, Bandyopadhyay T, Sabou M, Hanbury A (2024) Validating semantic artifacts with large language models. In: Meroño-Peñuela A, Corcho Ó, Groth P, Simperl E, Tamma V, Nuzzolese AG, Poveda-Villalón M, Sabou M, Presutti V, Celino I, Revenko A, Raad J, Sartini B, Lisena P (eds) The Semantic Web: ESWC 2024 Satellite Events - Hersonissos, Crete, Greece, May 26-30, 2024, Proceedings, Part I, Springer, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 15344, pp 92–101, DOI 10 .1007/978-3-031-78952-6 \_9, URL https://doi .org/10 .1007/978-3-031-78952-6_9 [14] Vandemoortele N, Steenwinckel B, Hoecke SV, Ongenae F (2024) Scalable table-to-knowledge graph matching from metadata using llms. In: Hassan-20 A. Beg and D. O’Donoghue and R. Monahan 

zadeh O, Abdelmageed N, Cremaschi M, Cutrona V, D’Adda F, Efthymiou V, Kruit B, Lobo EA, Mihindukulasooriya N, Pham NH (eds) Proceed-ings of the Semantic Web Challenge on Tabular Data to Knowledge Graph Matching co-located with the 23rd International Semantic Web Confer-ence (ISWC 2024), Baltimore, USA, November 13, 2024, CEUR Work-shop Proceedings, vol 3889, pp 54–68, URL https://ceur-ws .org/Vol-3889/ paper4 .pdf [15] Vasic I, Fill HG, Quattrini R, Pierdicca R (2025) Knowledge graphs vs. large language models: Competitors or partners in supporting virtual museums. ACM Journal on Computing and Cultural Heritage