Title: Spec2Cov: An Agentic Framework for Code Coverage Closure of Digital Hardware Designs

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.15606v1

Published Time: Mon, 20 Apr 2026 00:23:54 GMT

Number of Pages: 7

Markdown Content:
# Spec2Cov: An Agentic Framework for Code Coverage Closure of Digital Hardware Designs 

Sean Lowe 

Arizona State University Tempe, Arizona, USA slowe8@asu.edu 

Elias Hilaneh 

Arizona State University Tempe, Arizona, USA ehilaneh@asu.edu 

Alma Babbit 

Arizona State University Tempe, Arizona, USA asbabbit@asu.edu 

Nakul Gopalan 

Arizona State University Tempe, Arizona, USA nakul.gopalan@asu.edu 

Vidya Chhabria 

Arizona State University Tempe, Arizona, USA vachhabr@asu.edu 

Aman Arora 

Arizona State University Tempe, Arizona, USA aman.kbm@asu.edu 

Abstract —Hardware verification is one of the most challenging stages of the hardware design process, requiring significant time and resources to ensure a design is fully validated and production-ready. Verification teams aim to maximize design coverage while ensuring correct behavior and alignment with the specification. Coverage closure, which relies on iterative constrained-random and directed testing, is still largely manual and therefore slow and labor-intensive. Recent advances show that the code generation capabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs) can be integrated with external tools to build agentic workflows that autonomously perform hardware design and verification tasks. In this work, we introduce Spec2Cov, an agentic framework that automatically and iteratively generates test stimulus directly from design specifications to accelerate coverage closure. Spec2Cov coordinates interactions between an LLM and a hardware simulator, managing compilation and simulation errors, parsing coverage reports, and feeding results back to the model for refinement. We present features that improve Spec2Cov’s effectiveness without additional fine-tuning and evaluate their impact. Across 26 designs of varying size and complexity, including problems from the CVDP benchmark suite, Spec2Cov demonstrates promising performance, achieving 100% coverage on simpler designs and up to 49% on more complex designs. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Pre-silicon hardware verification is an exceedingly labori-ous and time-intensive process, often representing a critical bottleneck in achieving tapeouts. The goal of verification is to ensure that the implemented design matches the specifications. While faster execution is crucial, the necessity for high-quality verification, characterized by high coverage and low test fail rates, cannot be overstated. Coverage closure is an iterative process that starts by interpreting design specifications, drafting a detailed testplan, and developing a testbench with constrained-random testcases. Coverage data from regression runs is analyzed and directed tests are written to iteratively close coverage holes. In current practice, this cycle is still largely manual and consumes a substantial portion of verification time. Recent research has demonstrated that large language mod-els (LLMs) can be employed to generate design and veri-

Fig. 1: An overview of Spec2Cov, our agentic framework for rapid coverage closure. 

fication code automatically [1]–[4], including assertions and testcases. However, prior work has largely overlooked using design specifications as the primary source for verification code generation, which reduces practical applicability. Show-ing design code early can bias the LLM and leave design bugs unchecked. The design code is best shown to the LLM only during the iterative coverage closure phase. Moreover, the emergence of agentic frameworks - systems that combine LLMs with external tools and feedback loops - has opened new avenues for automation. Leveraging context-awareness, reasoning, and agentic capabilities of modern LLMs, we can significantly reduce human effort for coverage closure. In this work, we present Spec2Cov, an agentic framework that mirrors this workflow with minimal human intervention. It generates testcases directly from design specifications, inte-grates them into a testbench template, starts with constrained-random testing, and iteratively refines stimuli using coverage reports and simulator errors to close code-coverage holes. While functional coverage offers a more comprehensive assessment of design behavior and can improve overall quality, code coverage is widely regarded as essential across the industry and is typically considered the minimum requirement for verification signoff. Given its critical role, Spec2Cov framework focuses on code coverage, specifically statement (or line) coverage. Nevertheless, the proposed methodology is general and can be easily extended to other types of code 

> arXiv:2604.15606v1 [cs.AR] 17 Apr 2026

coverage and functional coverage. A high-level overview of Spec2Cov is shown in Fig 1. The LLM is given a specification that contains supporting context about a design’s functionality, submodules and implementation details. The LLM generates testcases which are integrated into a testbench template, starting with constrained random testcases. Based on simulator feedback, the LLM adapts and generates new testcases, progressively improving coverage in an autonomous loop. Spec2Cov accelerates coverage closure by automating stim-ulus generation and feedback using LLMs and simulator integration, reducing manual effort and speeding up verifica-tion. This frees engineers to focus on higher-value tasks like debugging and architectural refinement, boosting productivity without increasing headcount. It requires no additional model training, leveraging off-the-shelf LLMs for easy adoption, and lays the foundation for future agentic verification workflows. We make the following contributions in this work:  

> •

Spec2Cov Framework: We introduce Spec2Cov , an agentic framework that generates testcases directly from specifications and automates code coverage closure.  

> •

LLM Enhancement Techniques: We develop several techniques to improve the LLM’s effectiveness in gen-erating high-quality testcases and accelerating coverage closure. These include: Testplan creation from speci-fications, Batched generation for parallel exploration, 

Context pruning to manage prompt length.  

> •

Comprehensive Evaluation: We evaluate Spec2Cov on 26 designs, including verification tasks from the CVDP [10] and some designs from GitHub. These designs span a wide range of complexity levels (easy, medium, hard) and code sizes (14 to 4500 lines).  

> •

Performance Analysis: We assess Spec2Cov using pass@k and code coverage metrics, and report its compu-tational cost in terms of LLM generation time and token usage. Spec2Cov is the first open-source [11] framework focused on code coverage closure directly from specifications using CVDP designs for demonstration. II. R ELATED WORK 

Several studies have illustrated the use of LLMs for the generation of hardware design code. Chip-Chat [1] studies the challenges and opportunities in using LLMs for hardware design. The authors use ChatGPT to generate a small 8-bit microprocessor design. In VeriGen [12], the generation of hardware designs using ChatGPT and some fine-tuned LLMs is studied using a proprietary dataset created from GitHub and textbooks. GPT4AIGChip [13] applies ChatGPT to AI accelerator design and explores the limitations of LLMs when creating accelerator designs. Most recently, VerilogDB [14] and CVDP [10] present larger and more challenging RTL datasets for benchmarking and fine-tuning uses. Another inter-esting direction is debugging using LLMs. MEIC [15] focuses on debugging RTL design code using fine-tuning LLMs in an agentic workflow. UVLLM [16] identifies syntactical and functional errors in RTL designs using an agentic pipeline. There are some works using LLMs for hardware verification as well (Table I). ChiRAAG [5] uses ChatGPT to interac-tively improve verification assertion generation. AssertLLM [6] showcases using ChatGPT and Retrieval Augmented Gen-eration (RAG) to generate SystemVerilog assertions using design and specification using only one design. AutoBench [3] uses Anthropic Claude to generate hybrid testbenches using a long generation pipeline, using a dataset derived from HDLBits. LLM4DV [7] demonstrated LLMs for hardware test stimulus generation from given functional coverpoints using three designs. Verilog Reader [2] focuses on code coverage centric testcase generation by providing the design’s code to the LLM. It adds blocks such as DUT explainer and coverage explainer blocks to assist the LLM. Simple designs such as multiplexer, ALU, FSMs, counters and arbiters are used for evaluation. Hassan et al. [8] propose a simple framework to iteratively reach verification goals and review LLMs playing a semantic role in verification. Finally, Ye et al. [9] propose an agentic UVM-based framework and a new benchmark suite of nine designs to evaluate their framework. Our work focuses on generating testcases directly from design specifications with the goal of code coverage closure. 

A direct comparison with these works is not feasible due to fundamental differences in methodologies: (1) Spec2Cov uses a practical approach of providing specifications to generate testcases whereas other works provide the design directly to the LLM which can lead to testcases that have common-mode errors as the design code. (2) Spec2Cov is evaluated with a mix of CVDP benchmarks and open-source designs gathered from GitHub. No other frameworks use CVDP benchmarks. Prior works use much simpler designs, which do not challenge the capabilities of modern LLMs. III. T HE SPEC 2C OV FRAMEWORK 

A. Detailed Operation 

A detailed view of Spec2Cov is shown in Fig. 2. Spec2Cov interacts with the LLM through a structured sequence of prompts and with the simulator through a series of commands, while managing communication between them and logging artifacts. The overall process can be split into three phases. 

Phase 1: Initialization The process begins with a system prompt , which defines the role of the LLM as a verification engineer and specifies formatting rules for the expected output so that it can be easily parsed and processed. This is followed by the first user prompt in which the LLM is provided with the design specification and the top module’s port declara-tions extracted from the design. The prompt instructs the LLM to use constrained random stimulus, emulating industry-standard verification practices, to maximize initial coverage by generating testcases using constructs such as $urandom 

and .randomize() . This is referred to as the start of a 

conversation .If the LLM output cannot be parsed into the expected testcase structure, Spec2Cov marks it as a decode error . Upon TABLE I: Comparison of LLM-assisted hardware verification works                                                  

> Work DV Focus LLMs Used Agentic? Goal Benchmarks / Size
> ChiRAAG [5] Assertion gen. ChatGPT (GPT-4) Yes Improve SVA quality 7 OpenTitan mods; 3–16 SVAs AssertLLM [6] Assertion gen. ChatGPT+RAG No Spec →SVAs 1 I2C design; 23 signals AutoBench [3] Hybrid TB gen. ChatGPT (GPT-4) Yes UVM TB automation VerilogEval-Human; 156 HDLBits LLM4DV [7] Stimulus gen. GPT-3.5, LLaMA, Claude Yes Func. cov. closure 3 designs; ∼3.9k bins Verilog Reader [2] Test gen. GPT-4 / Turbo Yes Code coverage closure 24 custom designs; up to 500+ LOC Hassan et al. [8] Iterative DV GPT-4 (example) Yes General DV loop No formal dataset (conceptual) Ye et al. [9] UVM env. gen. GPT-4 Yes UVM automation 9 designs; ≤1.6k LOC
> Spec2Cov (Ours) Stimulus gen. GPT-4o Yes Code coverage closure CVDP + GitHub; 26 designs

Fig. 2: Detailed flow of the Spec2Cov framework 

successful generation, the testcase is inserted into an auto-generated testbench template (which instantiates the design and includes clock generation logic). The design and testbench are then passed to the simulator, which performs simulation with coverage metrics enabled. Compilation and runtime errors are fed back to the LLM for correction. Upon successful simulation of a user-specified number of random seeds, the framework merges the coverage reports. This constitutes the initial achieved coverage. 

Phase 2: Iterative Coverage Closure. Next, the framework parses the coverage report and extracts coverage holes in each module of the design. It then randomly chooses a module with coverage holes for the LLM to target. The LLM is shown the design code for the first time in this phase, mirroring the workflow of a human verification engineer. The prompt includes a randomly chosen module’s code, with annotations pointing out the coverage holes. At this stage, the complete design code is also embedded into the system prompt, enabling the LLM to understand inter-module context. This helps the LLM identify top-level stimuli to effectively target coverage gaps in lower-level modules. Each interaction in this phase is referred to as an iteration .The LLM either generates a new testcase or modifies an ex-isting one to target the identified coverage holes. The updated testbench is simulated, and the new coverage report is fed back to the LLM. This iterative loop continues until either 100% coverage is achieved or a user-defined maximum number of iterations is reached. At the end of the process, coverage data from all iterations is merged. 

Phase 3: Logging and Results Spec2Cov logs key artifacts and metrics throughout execution and stores them in a results directory. For each conversation, it saves testcases, compilation & simulation outputs, and coverage databases & reports. It also produces per-iteration summaries with error counts, coverage metrics, token usage, and runtime. This supports reproducibility and downstream analysis. 

B. Additional Features 

Spec2Cov employs features to improve the performance of the LLM in achieving coverage goals. Each of these features can be enabled or disabled easily through the command line. 

1) Testplan Creation: To more closely mirror industrial verification workflows, we prompt the LLM to generate a detailed testplan (or verification plan). This plan outlines the stimulus and corner cases likely needed to achieve high coverage. By doing so, we provide the LLM with synthetic context that mimics human reasoning, enhancing its ability to generate meaningful and targeted testcases. 

2) Batched Generation: Inspired by the way ChatGPT can produce multiple responses for user selection, Spec2Cov supports parallel generation of multiple testcases. The number of testcases is user-defined; we typically use 5, based on empirical observations that the pass@5 probability exceeds 95% across designs. This means that among five generated testcases, at least one is likely to pass with high coverage. All testcases are simulated, and the one achieving the highest coverage is selected to continue the iterative process. 

3) Context Pruning: Maintaining a manageable conversa-tion length is critical when interacting with LLMs. As the token count grows, the model’s ability to utilize context effec-tively diminishes, and generation time and cost can increase significantly. To address this, Spec2Cov employs context prun-ing , which trims the conversation to stay within a 15,000-token limit. We prune segments where the LLM is correcting its own mistakes, ensuring that only the most relevant and informative context is retained for subsequent iterations. IV. M ETHODOLOGY 

LLM Selection: We use ChatGPT-4o as the primary LLM in base form (no fine-tuning or post-training). Spec2Cov is model-agnostic and can run other LLMs with minimal integration effort. Other models such as Llama 3.3, Mixtral, Mistral, and DeepSeek were evaluated but did not consistently generate syntactically correct Verilog. 

LLM Settings: The LLM is configured with specific values of key parameters such as temperature and top-p. Temperature controls randomness in generated testcases, and Top-p governs diversity by adjusting nucleus sampling. We choose a temper-ature of 0.3 and a top-p of 0.7 based on a hyperparameter ex-ploration using pass@5 as an evaluation metric. These values are selected to balance diversity with syntactic correctness. 

Framework and Infrastructure : Spec2Cov is able to run LLMs locally or use an API endpoint like OpenAI or Azure, giving users a plug-and-play opportunity. The framework is written in Python and is controllable through various command line arguments that control settings like which LLM to use, which features to enable, how long the conversations are, etc. For local generation, the framework uses vLLM [17] for efficient GPU utilization and batched inference. 

Simulation Setup: We use Intel’s QuestaSim 23.4 to com-pile, simulate, and extract coverage metrics. However, the framework features a simulation API that allows any Verilog simulator to be plugged in. We currently support VCS and Verilator. 

Design Sources: We evaluate our framework on two classes of designs. (1) CVDP [10] designs: These are obtained from the agentic verification related problems in the CVDP benchmark suite (cid12-14). Because the CVDP dataset has many different problems, we use a subset of the suite that has complete design specifications and design code available. There are a couple of designs from the CVDP verification subset that are missing source files, so they were excluded from the subset we used. This resulted in 14 usable designs that have been incorporated. (2) GitHub designs: Since CVDP has only been recently released, we started creating a dataset of open-source designs from GitHub. It was challenging to find designs with specifications and with verification collateral on GitHub. We use twelve designs from GitHub [18]–[26] for evaluating Spec2Cov. We include these designs to increase the complexity diversity of the subset we are experimenting with. Notably, the seven hardest designs we use are all sourced from GitHub. These designs allow us to evaluate the performance of Spec2Cov on harder problems than CVDP. Table II summarizes the designs by number of levels of module hierarchy, lines of code, and difficulty levels. We consider a design to be Hard for coverage closure if total lines ≥ 450 or hierarchy ≥ 3, Medium if 150 ≤ total lines 

< 450 or hierarchy = 2 , otherwise Easy .                                                                                                         

> TABLE II: Designs used for evaluating Spec2Cov
> Key Design Module Hierarchy Levels Total Line Count Relative Diffi-culty
> e1 lfsr [10] 214 Easy e2 caesar cipher [10] 121 Easy e3 dual port memory [10] 130 Easy e4 multiplexer [10] 135 Easy e5 cont adder [10] 151 Easy e6 fixed arbiter [10] 177 Easy e7 alu [10] 172 Easy e8 ttc lite [10] 198 Easy e9 vndecorrelator [18] 180 Easy e10 door lock [10] 1137 Easy e11 fifo [19] 194 Easy e12 memory scheduler [10] 1129 Easy m1 sorter [10] 1164 Medium m2 poly interpolator [10] 2224 Medium m3 float multiplier [25] 2218 Medium m4 spi complex mult [10] 2348 Medium m5 rgb color space conv [10]1 282 Medium m6 pooling [26] 1412 Medium m7 cryptech uart [20] 2447 Medium h1 float adder [25] 2463 Hard h2 sha1 top [21] 3630 Hard h3 chacha top [22] 3778 Hard h4 trng csprng [23] 31579 Hard h5 trng mixer [23] 32004 Hard h6 trng top [23] 54099 Hard h7 sd controller top [24] 34492 Hard

Evaluation Metrics: We employed multiple metrics to assess syntactic correctness of LLM’s generated code, ade-quacy of the generated testcase for coverage, and efficiency of running the framework: 1) pass@k: Probability that at least one of k generated testcases compiles and simulates correctly. 2) Coverage score: Proportion of lines/statements exer-cised by a testcase. 3) Token usage: Number of tokens used per design. 4) Generation time: Time spent on LLM generation. 

Conversation Setup: To account for variability in LLM behavior, including occasional hallucinations or inconsistent outputs, for our evaluation, we conduct 5 independent conver-sations and compute the average coverage across them. Up to 20 iterations are run per conversation (less than 20 if 100% coverage is achieved). Coverage results are merged across iterations within each conversation, reflecting the common practice in industry to merge coverage across all testcases for a design. Also, the first testcase generated is simulated with 20 random seeds before moving on to iteratively closing coverage. For experiments with generating a testplan enabled, the LLM generates the testplan before the coverage closure phase. V. R ESULTS 

A. Overall Coverage Across Designs 

We first report the overall coverage achieved for each design under the mainline Spec2Cov configuration where testplan creation, batch generation, and context pruning are on. To the TABLE III: Spec2Cov achieves high coverage across benchmarks, with a 91.47% geometric mean. Coverage values represent the best performance achieved by merging results across multiple independent runs.                                            

> Design Spec2Cov Design Spec2Cov
> lfsr 100 poly interpolator 100 caesar cipher 80.00 rgb conversion 100 dual port memory 100 spi complex mult 100 multiplexer 100 pooling 97.71 cont adder 100 cryptech uart* 100 alu 100 float adder 91.58 fixed arbiter 100 sha1 top 100 vndecorrelator 100 chacha top 96.54 fifo 100 trng csprng 82.67 ttc lite 83.33 trng mixer 76.78 memory scheduler 98.28 trng top 55.55 door lock 100 sd controller top 49.31 sorter 100 geomean 91.47 float multiplier 100

Fig. 3: Agentic approach achieves significantly higher coverage, whereas the single iteration approach fails to produce any coverage in some cases. GM = Geometric Mean 

best of our knowledge, there is no prior work that addresses automated testcase generation from specifications for closing code coverage for CVDP designs. Consequently, our results cannot be compared against a prior baseline, and we instead report absolute performance metrics for our framework. The results are shown in Table III with designs ordered by size. Low-difficulty designs (simple datapath or control structures) achieve near-100% coverage on average. Medium-difficulty designs (moderate complexity, such as stateful con-trollers or multi-module arithmetic units) average between 85– 95% coverage. High-difficulty designs (cryptographic cores and large streaming datapaths) remain below 80–90% coverage on average, with the lowest observed coverage at 49%. This trend highlights both the strength of LLMs on simpler designs and the remaining verification challenges in scaling toward industrial-scale designs. 

B. Effect of Agentic Approach 

We illustrate the benefit of iterative prompting by comparing a single testcase generation to an agentic workflow with 20 it-erations. Fig. 3 shows that iterative, feedback-driven prompting substantially improves coverage over one-shot generation. 

C. Effect of Batched Generation, Testplan Creation, and Con-text Pruning 

We conduct studies to isolate the effect of key features: batched generation (BG), testplan creation (TC), and context 

Fig. 4: Impact on code coverage achieved by progressively adding Batched Generation (BG), Testplan Creation (TC), and Context Pruning (CP) features. All figures compare against the baseline. GM(x) = Geometric Mean of e(easy), m(medium), h(hard) designs. 

pruning (CP). We start with a baseline that does not have any of these features enabled, and then progressively add them in the order BG, TC, and CP to observe their cumulative impact. The results are presented in Fig. 4, wherein geometric means are presented across easy designs (GM(e)), medium designs (GM(m)), and hard designs (GM(h)). Unlike Table III, which reports the best coverage achieved by merging across runs, these figures show the average coverage achieved by a single conversation to illustrate typical single-run performance. The top subfigure shows that batched generation modestly improves medium and hard designs, while easy designs al-ready achieve high coverage without this feature. The middle subfigure reveals that adding testplan creation on top of batched generation does not consistently improve coverage. For some hard designs, this combination actually degrades performance compared to the baseline, suggesting that the testplan feature requires further refinement. To in-vestigate this, we devise an enhanced testplan approach in which the LLM generates a feature-based testplan, then creates independent testcases targeting each feature before moving to TABLE IV: Enhanced feature-based testplan approach leads to significant improvement over the baseline.                                   

> Design Baseline Enhanced Testplan ∆
> caesar cipher [10] 80.00 80.00 +0.00 fixed arbiter [10] 100 100.00 +0.00 ttc lite [10] 83.33 100.00 +16.67 pooling [26] 97.71 99.54 +1.83 trng top [23] 55.55 70.88 +15.38
> TABLE V: Spec2Cov achieves competitive pass@1 while maintain-ing stable performance at pass@3 and pass@5, demonstrating its robustness compared to feature-ablated configurations.
> Configuration pass@1 pass@3 pass@5
> Spec2Cov 0.500 0.565 0.609 –Testplan Creation 0.587 0.623 0.638 –Batched Generation 0.420 0.870 0.891
> –Context Pruning 0.354 0.507 0.632

iterative coverage closure (Phase 2). Preliminary results on selected designs are shown in Table IV, demonstrating promise for hierarchical feature-targeted testing that will guide future enhancements. The bottom subfigure shows the complete mainline con-figuration with all three features enabled (BG+TC+CP). No-tably, context pruning provides substantial recovery from the degradation caused by testplan creation, with some designs (e.g., fixed arbiter) achieving dramatic improvements to 100% coverage. This demonstrates that while individual features may not always help in isolation, their combination in the mainline configuration delivers strong overall performance. Context pruning is particularly crucial, as it helps the LLM focus on relevant information by removing polluted context, which can improve testcase generation quality. Spec2Cov provides extensive configurability to enable/dis-able features from the command line. Users can try multiple configurations for new designs to determine what works best. 

D. Compilation and Simulation Success 

We report pass@1/3/5 across various designs in Table V, capturing compilation and simulation success. We also show the effect of removing features on pass@k metrics. Removing testplan creation gives the highest pass@1, which was not an expected outcome. It is possible that the LLM tries to satisfy the entire testplan in the first iteration, leading to one or more errors, while in other configurations the LLM starts slower. Future work will investigate this behavior using a white-box approach. Removing the batch generation feature gives the highest pass@3 and pass@5, which makes intuitive sense because this feature enables generating more variations that fail, but also more variations that obtain higher coverage. Because of long-context degradation experienced by LLMs, where an LLM performs worse with too long of a context length, removing context pruning results in lower pass@k scores compared to other features. The CVDP paper [10] presents pass@1 data across eight LLMs. However, since the LLM used we use (ChatGPT-4o) is not included in the CVDP paper, we cannot make a direct comparison. However, to perform an indirect comparison, we can average the pass@1 across OpenAI models (ChatGPT-4.1, ChatGPT-o1, and ChatGPT-o1-mini) for problem sets cid12-14, which is 0.112. Thus, there is an improvement on CVDP verification problems using Spec2Cov than when using CVDP’s default agentic method. 

E. Generation Costs and Efficiency 

Finally, we evaluate the cost of using the LLM in Spec2Cov using generation time and token count. The geometric means for these metrics across hard, medium and easy design are shown in Fig. 5. Although token count and generation time generally increase with design size, anomalies occur because they also depend on iteration count and coverage difficulty. Table VI shows the number of iterations taken by each design to achieve the coverage shown in Table III. Each iteration corresponds to a single LLM-simulator exchange. Be-cause conversations run in parallel as independent processes, Spec2Cov can evaluate many design-testbench interactions quickly, reducing wall-clock time for coverage exploration. While traditional verification workflows often require hours or days to hand-craft and refine testcases, our agentic approach completes comparable exploration in minutes, demonstrating scalability for large-scale hardware verification.                                                   

> Design #Iter. Design #Iter.
> e1 2m1 20 e2 20 m2 1e3 2m3 2e4 1m4 1e5 2m5 20 e6 11 m6 20 e7 1m7 20 e8 20 h1 20 e9 1h2 20 e10 20 h3 20 e11 1h4 20 e12 20 h5 20 h6 20 h7 20
> TABLE VI: Average num-ber of iterations required for each design to achieve cover-age shown in Table III.
> Fig. 5: Average generation time and average total token usage in-creases as design complexity in-creases.

VI. D ISCUSSION 

Code Coverage Focus Spec2Cov targets code coverage because it is a standard sign-off gate before broader verifica-tion closure, and manual closure remains a major verification bottleneck. Automating this stage provides immediate work-flow impact and establishes a foundation for future functional-coverage extensions. 

LLM-Based Stimulus Generation Spec2Cov uses LLMs because scripted and constrained-random methods alone often miss corner-case behavior without manual guidance. LLMs add context-aware testplan generation, reasoning-based test-case development and iterative coverage enhancement, reduc-ing engineer effort in coverage closure. 

Scalability Spec2Cov is designed for module- and subsystem-level verification in hierarchical flows, and our eval-uation includes designs up to five hierarchy levels and 4500 lines of code. Future work will include RAG-based context management, hierarchical test composition, and feature-based testplanning (early evidence in Section V-C). 

Rich-Text Specifications Most specification documents are written in rich-text format with tables and figures. Spec2Cov supports ingesting feature-rich PDFs and extracts content by using PyMuPDF and pdfplumber tools. VII. C ONCLUSION 

We present Spec2Cov, an agentic framework that automates code coverage closure for digital hardware designs by gener-ating testcases directly from specifications and iteratively re-fining them using simulator feedback. Our evaluation demon-strates that an LLM-driven, tool-integrated workflow can sub-stantially reduce manual effort in verification while main-taining competitive coverage and compilation success rates. Spec2Cov establishes a practical foundation for specification-driven, agentic verification flows and highlights the potential of LLMs to accelerate pre-silicon verification processes. REFERENCES [1] J. Blocklove, S. Garg, R. Karri, and H. Pearce, “Chip-Chat: Chal-lenges and Opportunities in Conversational Hardware Design,” in 2023 ACM/IEEE 5th Workshop on Machine Learning for CAD (MLCAD) ,Sep. 2023, pp. 1–6. [2] R. Ma, Y. Yang, Z. Liu, J. Zhang, M. Li, J. Huang, and G. Luo, “VerilogReader: LLM-Aided Hardware Test Generation,” in 2024 IEEE LLM Aided Design Workshop (LAD) , Jun. 2024, pp. 1–5. [3] R. Qiu, G. L. Zhang, R. Drechsler, U. Schlichtmann, and B. Li, “Au-toBench: Automatic Testbench Generation and Evaluation Using LLMs for HDL Design,” in Proceedings of the 2024 ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Machine Learning for CAD , ser. MLCAD ’24. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, Sep. 2024, pp. 1–10. [4] Z. Zhang, G. Chadwick, H. McNally, Y. Zhao, and R. Mullins, “LLM4DV: Using Large Language Models for Hardware Test Stimuli Generation,” Oct. 2023. [5] B. Mali, K. Maddala, V. Gupta, S. Reddy, C. Karfa, and R. Karri, “ChIRAAG: ChatGPT Informed Rapid and Automated Assertion Gen-eration,” in 2024 IEEE Computer Society Annual Symposium on VLSI (ISVLSI) . Knoxville, TN, USA: IEEE, Jul. 2024, pp. 680–683. [6] W. Fang, M. Li, M. Li, Z. Yan, S. Liu, H. Zhang, and Z. Xie, “AssertLLM: Generating Hardware Verification Assertions from Design Specifications via Multi-LLMs,” in 2024 IEEE LLM Aided Design Workshop (LAD) , Jun. 2024, pp. 1–1. [7] “Illm4dv: Using large language models for hardware test stimuli gener-ation.” [8] M. Hassan, M. Nadeem, K. Qayyum, C. K. Jha, and R. Drechsler, “Prompt. Verify. Repeat. LLMs in the Hardware Verification Cycle,” in 

2025 IEEE International Conference on Omni-layer Intelligent Systems (COINS) , 2025, pp. 1–6. [9] J. Ye, Y. Hu, K. Xu, D. Pan, Q. Chen, J. Zhou, S. Zhao, X. Fang, X. Wang, N. Guan, and Z. Jiang, “From Concept to Practice: an Automated LLM-aided UVM Machine for RTL Verification,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19959 [10] N. Pinckney, C. Deng, C.-T. Ho, Y.-D. Tsai, M. Liu, W. Zhou, B. Khailany, and H. Ren, “Comprehensive Verilog Design Problems: A Next-Generation Benchmark Dataset for Evaluating Large Language Models and Agents on RTL Design and Verification,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.14074 [11] Anonymous, “Spec2Cov,” 2025, https://anonymous.4open.science/r/spec2cov. [12] S. Thakur, B. Ahmad, H. Pearce, B. Tan, B. Dolan-Gavitt, R. Karri, and S. Garg, “VeriGen: A Large Language Model for Verilog Code Generation,” ACM Transactions on Design Automation of Electronic Systems , p. 3643681, Feb. 2024. [13] Y. Fu, Y. Zhang, Z. Yu, S. Li, Z. Ye, C. Li, C. Wan, and Y. C. Lin, “GPT4AIGChip: Towards Next-Generation AI Accelerator Design Automation via Large Language Models,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.10730 [14] P. E. Calzada, Z. Ibnat, T. Rahman, K. Kandula, D. Lu, S. K. Saha, F. Farahmandi, and M. Tehranipoor, “VerilogDB: The Largest, Highest-Quality Dataset with a Preprocessing Framework for LLM-based RTL Generation,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.13369 [15] K. Xu, J. Sun, Y. Hu, X. Fang, W. Shan, X. Wang, and Z. Jiang, MEIC: Re-thinking RTL Debug Automation using LLMs . New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://doi-org.ezproxy1.lib.asu.edu/10.1145/3676536.3676801 [16] Y. Hu, J. Ye, K. Xu, J. Sun, S. Zhang, X. Jiao, D. Pan, J. Zhou, N. Wang, W. Shan, X. Fang, X. Wang, N. Guan, and Z. Jiang, “UVLLM: An Automated Universal RTL Verification Framework using LLMs,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.16238 [17] W. Kwon, Z. Li, S. Zhuang, Y. Sheng, L. Zheng, C. H. Yu, J. E. Gonzalez, H. Zhang, and I. Stoica, “Efficient Memory Management for Large Language Model Serving with PagedAttention,” in Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 29th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles ,2023. [18] J. Str¨ ombergson, “vndecorrelator: Verilog implementation of a von Neu-mann decorrelator,” https://github.com/secworks/vndecorrelator, 2016. [19] A. Vashist, “FIFO SystemVerilog Assertion: Syn-chronous FIFO with SystemVerilog Assertions,” https://github.com/avashist003/FIFO SystemVerilog Assertion, 2020. [20] J. Str¨ ombergson, “uart: Verilog implementation of a simple UART core,” https://github.com/secworks/uart, 2014. [21] J. Str¨ ombergson, “sha1: Verilog implementation of the SHA-1 hash function,” https://github.com/secworks/sha1, 2014. [22] J. Str¨ ombergson, “chacha: Verilog implementation of the ChaCha stream cipher,” https://github.com/secworks/chacha, 2014. [23] J. Str¨ ombergson, “trng: True Random Number Generator core imple-mented in Verilog,” https://github.com/secworks/trng, 2014. [24] M. Czerski, “SD-card-controller: SD/SDHC card controller for Wish-bone bus,” https://github.com/mczerski/SD-card-controller, 2013. [25] S. Mehta, “DSP Slice: Floating Point Units,” https://github.com/samidhm/DSP Slice/tree/main/Floating Point Units, 2020. [26] V. Patel and UT-LCA, “tpu like design: TPU-like design with pooling unit,” https://github.com/UT-LCA/tpu like design/tree/master/design ws vedant, 2019.