Title: BlueprintRepair: Typed Local Edits for Failed Lean Proof Blueprints

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.28110v1

Published Time: Fri, 31 Jul 2026 00:58:04 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
# BlueprintRepair: Typed Local Edits for Failed Lean Proof Blueprints 

Ruslan Khrulev Lomonosov Moscow State University 

ra.khrulev@gmail.com 

Abstract 

LLM-based Lean proving systems increasingly organize a proof as a blueprint : a dependency graph of formal statements. We introduce B LUEPRINT REPAIR , a repair interface that lets a model change this graph through ten schema-checked local operations. An operation names the node it edits, so the target theorem cannot be changed. Lean checks every applied change, and an accepted repair must declare every blueprint lemma its proof uses. We also construct BLUEPRINT TRACE , a benchmark of 142 controlled failures with complete accepted and rejected repair trajectories. We compare typed edits, exact source patches, and complete module rewrites under matched source, feedback, model, and budget, one episode per state and interface. With DeepSeek-V4-Flash, the three interfaces solve almost the same number of the benchmark’s localized failures. Typed repair is the cheapest per solved state (patching is 1.30 × as expensive, rewriting 2.06 ×), and within 10 ,000 completion tokens per task it reaches almost all of its final coverage, while both free-form interfaces are well behind. A second model, Qwen3.6-Flash, solves fewer states but keeps typed repair cheapest, puts it ahead on the proof-authoring states, and repeats the localized pattern. 

# 1 Introduction 

LLM-based theorem provers have traditionally generated tactics or complete proofs (Yang et al., 2023; First et al., 2023; Ren et al., 2025). Newer systems first build a structured proof plan. In Lean (de Moura and Ullrich, 2021), this plan can be represented as a blueprint : a dependency graph whose nodes are formal statements and whose edges record which statements a proof is meant to use. LeanArchitect maintains this metadata inside Lean developments (Zhu et al., 2026); Goedel-Architect and LeanMarathon use evolving blueprints to coordinate longer proving and formalization processes (Chung et al., 2026; Zhang et al., 2026b). Once the proof plan is explicit, repair need not begin by regenerating the whole Lean file. A failed blueprint may contain a false intermediate lemma, a missing dependency, or an unused node. In these cases, a small change to the existing graph may be enough. A different failure occurs when all statements and edges are correct, but one lemma still lacks a proof. We ask: when are typed local edits sufficient, and when is freer Lean code generation more useful? 

Revising a failed proof plan is not new (Chung et al., 2026; Xiao et al., 2026); what differs is the editable object: a declaration-level LeanArchitect graph changed through schema-checked operations rather than freshly written Lean text. We propose B LUEPRINT REPAIR , a typed local-edit interface for failed Lean blueprints. At each step, the model chooses one of ten operations that can change a statement, add or remove an edge, split or delete a node, or write a proof for one node. The harness 1arXiv:2607.28110v1 [cs.AI] 30 Jul 2026 p159 (miniF2F amc12b_2003_p9 ):         

> f(x)= ax +b,f(6) −f(2)=12 ⊢f(12) −f(2)=30

(a) localized graph defect                

> diff_four
> f(6) −f(2) = 4 a
> diff_ten
> f(12) −f(2) = 10 a
> a_value
> slope: a= 3
> final_step
> ∀a: 10 a=30 false
> target
> unproved
> injected defect: the hypothesis
> a=3 is removed; the weakened lemma is false and Lean refutes it
> p144 (miniF2F imo_1959_p1 ):
> gcd(21 n+4 ,14 n+3) = 1 for 0< n

(b) compound state: chained defects                     

> gcd_left
> g|21 n+4
> combo
> 3(14 n+3) −2(21 n+4) = 2
> false: the true combination gives 1
> gcd_right
> g|14 n+3
> dvd_one
> d|21 n+4 ⇒d|1
> premise d|14 n+3 dropped
> small_case
> gcd(25 ,17) = 1 (debris)
> target
> unproved
> a false certificate feeds a divisibil-ity step that lost a premise: two defects chained on the used path, plus a disconnected spot-check
> p170 (miniF2F):
> the three-variable AM–HM bound

(c) proof-authoring failure            

> amhm_cleared
> 9pqr ≤(p+q+r)( pq +qr +rp )
> pair_pos
> pair sums >0
> pair_sum
> sum = 2( x+y+z)
> target
> 9
> x+y+z≤2
> x+y+2
> y+z+2
> z+x
> every statement and edge is correct; repair must supply proof content

Figure 1: Three benchmark examples. (a) A localized defect weakens a lemma until it becomes false. (b) A compound state contains two linked defects on the target path and one disconnected node. (c) In a proof-authoring state, the graph is correct but the remaining theorem still needs proof content. Statements are abbreviated; Table 1 lists all failure families. 

applies the operation mechanically and returns Lean feedback. We compare this interface with two free-form alternatives: atomic search-and-replace patches over the current source and complete module rewriting. All three see the same normalized source, typed state, verifier feedback, model, and budget. The only intended difference is how a repair is expressed. A kernel-accepted target theorem is necessary but not sufficient for blueprint repair. Suppose the proof of a node uses another blueprint lemma but the graph does not declare that dependency. Lean may still accept the theorem, while the blueprint remains wrong. We therefore inspect each compiled proof term and reject any repair with an undeclared blueprint dependency. This check directly addresses the central distinction of the paper: we evaluate repaired proof graphs, not only repaired target proofs. On the 91 states with localized graph or statement defects, typed repair solves 79 states with DeepSeek-V4-Flash (DeepSeek-AI, 2026a,b) and each free-form interface solves 81 ; a second model, Qwen3.6-Flash (Qwen Team, 2026), shows the same pattern. The small coverage gap comes with a large efficiency difference. Typed repair reaches 103 total solves within 10 ,000 completion tokens per task, compared with 90 for patching and 87 for rewriting, and has the lowest provider cost per solve. Patching obtains the highest observed total, though no pairwise difference is clear of zero, and each interface is the sole solver of a few states, so the three together cover more than any one of them. These results support a simple systems view: when a blueprint is mostly correct, typed local edits recover most of the reachable coverage at the lowest cost, and free-form generation buys the remainder at a higher price. 

Our main contributions are: 

• A typed local-repair interface. Ten schema-checked operations edit statements, nodes, edges, and proofs while Lean verifies every resulting state. • A graph-aware acceptance criterion. In addition to preserving and proving the target, an accepted module must declare every inter-node dependency found in its compiled proof terms. • A controlled three-interface study. Typed edits, local source patches, and whole-module 2Table 1: Controlled failure families. Excluding the 12 compound states, the first five families hold the 91                           

> edit-shaped states and the last two the 39 proof-authoring states. A compound state is counted under the family of its first failing defect but evaluated as a separate stratum. Example repairs are possibilities, not required routes.
> Family nInjected defect Example typed repair
> false / too strong 23 false statement on the target path weaken, rewrite, or drop it missing hypothesis 34 required assumption removed strengthen hypotheses missing dependency 18 proof uses an undeclared lemma add the missing edge redundant dependency 14 unnecessary node wired into the path remove edge or node dead node 14 node lies outside the target closure remove the unused node monolithic 31 intact node not closed by the prover split or prove the node representation 8inconvenient formal representation restate and prove

rewrites receive equal source access and feedback, allowing a direct comparison of coverage, token use, cost, and control. • A trajectory dataset. BLUEPRINT TRACE contains the failed states, construction metadata, accepted and rejected actions, Lean feedback, graph checks, token and cost records, and final modules. 

# 2 Repair task and benchmark 

What counts as a repaired blueprint. A blueprint is a directed acyclic graph over a Lean module. An edge u → v means that the proof of node v declares node u as a dependency. Let C be the target theorem together with every node that can reach it along declared edges. A state is accepted only when (i) the full module elaborates, (ii) every node in C is proved, (iii) the target statement is unchanged and contains no forbidden proof shortcut, (iv) no node is a stored kernel-refuted statement, and (v) the compiled proofs agree with the declared graph. The last condition is easiest to state for one proved node v. Declared( v) is the set of blueprint nodes connected to v by its incoming proofUses edges. Actual( v) is the set of blueprint nodes reached from the elaborated proof term of v; the extractor follows ordinary helper definitions and stops when it reaches another blueprint node. We require 

Actual( v) ⊆ Declared( v).

Thus a proof may not use an undeclared blueprint lemma. We do not require exact equality because a repaired proof can stop using an edge that is still harmlessly declared; we record such unused edges as a separate quality signal. Nodes outside C must still elaborate and must not be refuted, but they do not contribute to the target proof and may remain deferred. We separately report whether every node in the module is complete. Appendix B states the check in full. 

Two repair regimes. Figure 1 shows the distinction measured by the benchmark. In an edit-shaped 

failure, at least one statement, node, or edge is wrong. A proof-only change may bypass the defect, but the failed graph itself contains a known structural error. In a proof-authoring failure, the statements and edges are intact, but the fixed node prover does not close one of the required nodes. The label is operational: it describes failure under the fixed prover used by the harness. Appendix B.2 reports a stronger-automation baseline on exactly these states. 3Table 2: Graph-size ranges in the controlled benchmark. 

Stratum n nodes edges max depth 

all 142 1–8 0–8 3edit-shaped 91 2–7 0–6 3proof-authoring 39 1–5 0–4 1compound 12 5–8 3–8 3

Controlled states. The benchmark contains 142 failed blueprints over 141 distinct miniF2F target theorems (Zheng et al., 2022). The targets come from the miniF2F Test and Valid splits at a pinned commit ( 244 items each). A mechanical filter on the statement’s type surface removes 86 analysis-style items; from the remaining pool of 402 we chose targets manually, balancing failure families and topic areas, and one target contributes two independently constructed states. We start from correct, author-constructed blueprints and introduce defects from Table 1. Each state is checked before any model run: false statements have Lean refutations, target statements are preserved, dependency defects are confirmed against compiled proof terms, monolithic states keep their original statements and edges, and representation states swap one statement for a true but inconvenient form. The model is not required to undo the construction edit; any final module is valid when it proves the original target and passes the acceptance criterion above. Of the 142 states, 91 contain one localized edit-shaped failure, 39 are proof-authoring failures, and 12 are compound states with linked defects. The graphs are intentionally small so that the experiment isolates repair rather than long-horizon search; Table 2 gives their size ranges. 

# 3 The B LUEPRINT REPAIR interface 

Figure 2 shows the complete interaction loop. The model receives the current blueprint, the current Lean source, and typed diagnostics. It emits one action in the format required by its interface. The harness applies the action, elaborates the module, runs the fixed node prover on deferred nodes, checks actual proof dependencies against declared edges, and returns a short reason for every accepted or rejected step. The new state then becomes the input to the next turn. All transitions are stored in BLUEPRINT TRACE . 

> failed blueprint
> LLM repair policy
> one repair action
> harness applies the action
> Lean checker and node prover
> graph check: every actual proof dependency is declared
> BLUEPRINT TRACE action and feedback log
> typed feedback

Figure 2: The repair loop used by all three interfaces. The harness applies one candidate action, Lean checks the resulting module, and the graph check returns structured feedback for the next step. 

4Table 3: The ten typed operations, grouped by purpose.           

> Purpose Operations
> change a statement weaken_node ,strengthen_hypotheses ,
> rewrite_node_statement
> change graph structure split_node ,add_dependency ,drop_dependency
> remove a node drop_false_node ,drop_dead_node
> write proof content set_node_proof
> end the episode stop_unrepairable

Typed local edits. Our proposed interface exposes the ten operations in Table 3. A call must satisfy a JSON schema and refer to existing nodes. The harness rejects unknown names, cycles, forbidden constructs, target statement changes, and inconsistent proof dependencies. The operations are local: source outside the requested edit is preserved mechanically. 

Two free-form comparisons. The local-patch interface returns one or more exact search-and-replace blocks. All blocks are applied atomically, so a failed match leaves the module unchanged. The rewrite interface returns a complete replacement module. Patch and rewrite candidates pass the same parser, allowed-import, namespace, forbidden-token, target-signature, Lean, and graph-dependency checks as typed repairs. Table 4 summarizes what remains different. In particular, patching controls for the main concern with a rewrite-only baseline: it sees the full source and can make a small free-form edit without regenerating untouched code. 

Matched evaluation protocol. The main experiment gives every interface the same normalized module, typed state, verifier feedback, pinned DeepSeek-V4-Flash model, output cap, and interaction budget. Each step may use one model response; the limit is eight steps for ordinary states and twelve for compound states. A candidate counts as solved only after the online acceptance checks described in Section 2. Appendix C gives the configuration and the three system prompts in full; the schemas, Lean versions, token accounting, and pricing snapshots are part of the artifact. 

A second model. We repeat the same evaluation with Qwen3.6-Flash. The states, prompts, interfaces, budgets, output cap, and acceptance checks are unchanged.                 

> Table 4: Interface properties. All three interfaces see the same current source, typed diagnostics, and verifier feedback.
> Property Typed Patch Rewrite
> output unit one operation edit blocks full module untouched source preserved mechanically mechanically no semantic action schema yes no no target guard fires before applying after applying after applying

5Table 5: Solved controlled states. A state counts only if the repair is accepted during the run and the stored file passes the same later dependency check. Both models see the same states and are counted the same way.                                     

> State type nTyped Patch Rewrite
> DeepSeek-V4-Flash
> edit-shaped 91 79 81 81 proof-authoring 39 16 18 13 compound 12 910 10 total 142 104 109 104
> Qwen3.6-Flash
> edit-shaped 91 70 71 72 proof-authoring 39 10 77compound 12 410 5total 142 84 88 84

# 4 Results 

4.1 Coverage 

Table 5 reports the controlled benchmark. A state counts as solved only if the repair is accepted during the run and the stored file passes the dependency check we repeat afterwards (end of this subsection). With DeepSeek-V4-Flash, typed local repair solves 79 of the 91 edit-shaped failures, only two fewer than either free-form interface. Patching and rewriting solve 10 of the 12 compound states, and typed repair solves 9. On the 39 proof-authoring failures, local patching leads with 18 ,typed repair solves 16 , and rewriting solves 13 . Across all 142 states, patching has the highest final coverage ( 109 ), followed by typed repair and rewriting ( 104 each). These gaps are small relative to the sample. On the primary endpoint, the 91 edit-shaped states, typed repair and patching disagree on four states only: a paired difference of −2.2 points with a 95% interval of [−6.6, +2 .2] (exact McNemar p = 0 .63 , source theorems resampled), and no pairwise difference on any stratum is clear of zero. The interval covers uncertainty over states of this construction, not over repeated samples from the model, and an interval covering zero is not evidence of equivalence. The overlap is also informative. Typed repair and patching solve 78 edit-shaped states in common; one is solved only by typed repair and three only by patching. Typed repair and rewriting solve 77 

in common; two are solved only by typed repair and four only by rewriting. Thus the methods are not only different encodings of the same successes: each free-form interface adds a small number of localized repairs, while typed repair also closes cases that each of them misses. Over all 142 states, 89 are solved by all three interfaces and 24 by none; Table 7 in Appendix B.3 splits both by injected family. Each interface is the sole solver of a few: two states are solved only by typed repair, three only by patching and three only by rewriting. The three interfaces together cover 

118 of the 142 states. 

Repeating the dependency check afterwards. During a run, a step is refused if the proof it produces uses a blueprint lemma for which no edge is declared. That check sees the module the harness builds. We therefore repeat it on the files we store: every stored repair that can be elaborated again gets one more Lean run, 317 in all, comparing the lemmas each proof actually uses against 6DeepSeek-V4-Flash 1k 10k 100k           

> completion tokens per task (log scale)
> 0
> 25
> 50
> 75
> 100
> 125
> tasks solved (of 142)  10k budget
> at 10k all
> typed repair 103 104/142
> patching 90 109/142
> rewriting 87 104/142
> patch ahead from here (a)
> $0.0001 $0.001 $0.01
> provider price per task ($, log scale)
> 0
> 25
> 50
> 75
> 100
> 125
> tasks solved (of 142)
> all-in per solve
> $0.0046
> $0.0059
> $0.0094
> patch ahead from here (b)

Qwen3.6-Flash 1k 10k 100k           

> completion tokens per task (log scale)
> 0
> 25
> 50
> 75
> 100
> 125
> tasks solved (of 142)  10k budget
> at 10k all
> typed 81 84/142
> patch 61 88/142
> rewrite 45 84/142
> patch ahead from here (c)
> $0.0001 $0.001 $0.01 $0.1
> provider price per task ($, log scale)
> 0
> 25
> 50
> 75
> 100
> 125
> tasks solved (of 142)
> all-in per solve
> $0.0267
> $0.0619
> $0.0847
> patch ahead from here (d)

Figure 3: Cumulative solved states as the per-task budget increases, for both models. Panels (a) and (c) use completion tokens; panels (b) and (d) use provider price. All four use the same 142 initial states, count solved as in Table 5, and stop charging a task when it is first solved. The token axes are identical, so the two models’ left-hand panels can be read against each other; the price axes are not, because Qwen3.6-Flash output is priced an order of magnitude above DeepSeek-V4-Flash’s. 

the edges the blueprint declares. No stored repair hides a dependency: 104 of 104 typed, 109 of 109 

patch, and 104 of 104 rewrite results pass. The reverse is not true: some repairs keep declared edges that their proofs no longer use; Appendix B reports them. 

The second model. Qwen3.6-Flash solves fewer states in every interface. The comparison between interfaces still repeats. On the 91 edit-shaped failures the three interfaces stay within two states of each other ( 70 typed, 71 patch, 72 rewrite). Two results do not repeat. On the 12 compound states typed repair solves 4 while patching solves 10 , and on the 39 proof-authoring states typed repair leads with 10 against 7 for both free-form interfaces. The later dependency check is again passed by every stored repair: 84 of 84 typed, 88 of 88 patch, and 84 of 84 rewrite. 

4.2 Efficiency under equal budgets 

Panels (a) and (b) of Figure 3 report the matched DeepSeek-V4-Flash run. The typed interface reaches useful coverage earlier: with at most 10 ,000 completion tokens per task it has already solved 

103 states, compared with 90 for patching and 87 for rewriting. This is almost the full typed total of 

104 . Patching eventually reaches 109 and overtakes the typed curve only after 34 ,767 completion tokens per task. Rewriting reaches the same total of 104 as typed repair, but needs 96 ,944 completion tokens per task to get there. 7The same pattern appears in provider cost. Typed repair has the lowest all-in cost per accepted solve: relative to it, patching is 1.30 × as expensive and full rewriting is 2.06 × as expensive. The comparison includes unsuccessful episodes and all input and output charges. The result is not merely that typed responses are shorter: the frontier asks how many states are solved under the same cumulative budget and therefore combines response length, number of attempts, failures, and early stopping. 

The second model. Panels (c) and (d) repeat the reading for Qwen3.6-Flash. The ordering between interfaces is the same and the gaps are wider. Within 10 ,000 completion tokens per task, typed repair has already solved 81 of the 84 states it ever solves, against 61 of 88 for patching and 45 of 84 for rewriting. Per accepted solve, patching costs 2.32 × and rewriting 3.17 × as much as typed repair ($0.027 per solve for typed repair, $0.062 and $0.085 for the free-form interfaces). 

4.3 Control and repair behavior 

All three interfaces keep the target statement, but they stop a change at different points. A typed operation names the node it edits, so an attempt on the target is refused before anything is applied; three such calls occur in the matched run and all are refused. Patching and rewriting write Lean text and are checked afterwards against the target signature: rewriting returns a module in which no node carries the target statement in 12 responses, all rejected, and every patch keeps the target statement in this run. The graph-dependency gate also rejects two typed, five patch, and one rewrite candidates that would otherwise leave proof use inconsistent with the declared blueprint; as reported above, none of the accepted results violates that rule either. The interfaces preserve source at different granularities. A typed operation changes only the requested graph object, and a patch changes only text matched by its blocks. Rewriting may replace the whole decomposition. We treat graph size, disconnected nodes, unused edges, statement changes, and full-module completion as separate quality dimensions rather than collapsing them into the solve label; Appendix B.4 reports what each interface leaves behind. 

The remaining gap is not a missing operation. Patching solves 11 states that typed repair does not. Either the typed belt lacks an operation those repairs need, or it has the operations and the model chose badly. To tell these apart we take each accepted patch, write by hand the typed calls that produce the same repair, and run them through the same harness and the same checks; no model is involved. All 11 repairs can be expressed: 10 reproduce the final module exactly, and the eleventh differs only in declaration names, which no typed operation changes. The longest takes 6 calls, every program fits the budget its own episode had, and every intermediate state passes the checks. The gap is therefore in which actions were chosen, not in which actions exist. This shows that the repairs are reachable, not that the model would have found them. Both interfaces saw the same source, and no program reuses a proof body the typed side was not shown. 

Combining the interfaces. Replaying the runs we already have in a fixed order (each interface starting again from the initial failed state, a task stopping at its first accepted repair) reaches 118 of the 142 states. Every order reaches that number, but starting with the typed interface is the cheapest ($1 .41 against $1 .66 for the most expensive order). 8Table 6: BLUEPRINT TRACE at a glance. controlled states 142 failed blueprints over 141 miniF2F targets; seven families plus compound states per-step records source, graph, action, applied change, Lean feedback, dependency scan, tokens, and cost terminal records final module, target certificate, strict completion, graph quality, and solve label reproducibility exact prompts, all ten schemas, model identifiers, the pinned Lean environment, and analysis scripts 

# 5 BLUEPRINT TRACE : states, trajectories, and audits 

BLUEPRINT TRACE is the data counterpart of the repair harness. The artifact holds all 142 controlled states as a single table: the source theorem, the initial Lean module, the graph, typed node statuses, and construction metadata. The metadata records the correct source blueprint or the documented injected defects and the Lean checks that support the assigned family. This information explains how the state was created; it does not prescribe the repair that a model must produce. For each interface, an episode stores every model response, whether it was applied, the exact graph and source change, Lean and node-prover feedback, the actual-versus-declared dependency scan, token and cost usage, and the final module. Rejected actions are retained with their reasons. These rows show which repair decisions were attempted but invalid in a particular state: for example, an edge that would create a cycle, a proof that uses an undeclared node, or a rewrite that changes the target. A release containing only successful final proofs could not recover these decisions later. The artifact also contains the exact system prompts, the machine-readable JSON schemas for all ten typed operations, the pinned Lean environment, the model identifiers, pricing snapshots, and scripts that regenerate the reported tables and frontier curves. This makes the interface contract and the evaluation predicate inspectable, not just the final solve labels. 

# 6 Related work 

Editable plans and blueprints. EditableSketch and SketchRefine preserve proved subgoals while correcting or further decomposing a proof sketch (Xiao et al., 2026). This is the closest motivation to our local-repair view. The editable object differs: B LUEPRINT REPAIR operates on a LeanArchitect declaration-level DAG and can change formal statements, proofs, nodes, and explicit dependency metadata. Our additional focus is a schema-checked action interface, controlled graph-defect families, an actual-versus-declared proof invariant, and trajectories that retain rejected edits. Goedel-Architect, LeanMarathon, LEAP, and difficulty-aware decomposition also revise proof plans with verifier feedback (Chung et al., 2026; Zhang et al., 2026b; Kung et al., 2026; Zhang et al., 2026a). 

Proof repair and verifier feedback. Baldur and APOLLO repair proof text from previous attempts and compiler messages (First et al., 2023; Ospanov et al., 2025); APRIL and OProver turn failed attempts into supervision or iterative context (Wang et al., 2026; Ma et al., 2026). Proof Repair across Type Equivalences transforms Coq proof terms after type changes (Ringer et al., 2021); our task instead repairs a failed Lean blueprint and its dependency metadata. VERITAS and process-verified 9reinforcement learning use Lean feedback for search or credit assignment (Acharya et al., 2026; Kim and Yun, 2026). 

Process data, cost, and benchmark checks. FormalRewardBench injects controlled proof errors to evaluate reward models (Ulu¸ san et al., 2026); B LUEPRINT TRACE adds stateful graph actions and typed rejection reasons. Cost-aware agent control chooses whether to continue or restart a proof plan (Rögnvaldsson et al., 2026); our frontier instead compares three repair interfaces under matched budgets. Recent benchmark audits show why a kernel-correct target alone is not a complete evaluation guarantee (Ammanamanchi et al., 2026). This motivates our preserved target provenance, explicit graph-dependency check, and retained audit records. 

# 7 Conclusion 

Agents already repair code through a loop of tool calls. B LUEPRINT REPAIR asks what changes when the tools are ten typed operations on a proof graph rather than free-form edits to a file, and when a repair is accepted only if its compiled proof agrees with the declared graph. With DeepSeek-V4-Flash, on 91 localized failures, typed edits solve 79 states versus 81 for both local patching and complete rewriting. Across all 142 states, patching reaches the highest observed total (no pairwise coverage difference is clear of zero), but typed repair reaches almost all of its coverage much earlier: 103 solves at a 10 ,000 -completion-token budget, compared with 90 and 87 . It also has the lowest cost per solve; patching is 1.30 × as expensive and rewriting 2.06 × as expensive. A second model, Qwen3.6-Flash, solves fewer states and keeps the same cost ordering, although its coverage pattern breaks on the states that carry more than one defect. Finally, typed repair refuses a target statement change before it is applied, and every accepted endpoint is checked for undeclared proof dependencies. B LUEPRINT TRACE exposes the full interaction data needed to learn better repair policies from both successful and rejected structural edits. 

# 8 Limitations 

Small controlled graphs. The benchmark isolates local repair on blueprints with one to eight nodes and target paths of depth at most three. The compound set contains only twelve states. Results may change on research-scale formalizations with longer paths, more shared definitions, and defects introduced over many refinement rounds. 

Stochastic model behavior. The reported table uses one episode per state and interface, so it describes the observed runs rather than an expectation over repeated samples. Repeating the same three-way protocol with a second model tests whether the qualitative pattern transfers across model families, but it does not replace multi-seed estimation within one model. 

Operational proof-authoring label. A state is called proof-authoring when the fixed rfl /simp /

omega node prover does not close an otherwise intact graph: no statement is false and no dependency is wrong. The label describes the harness and budget, not intrinsic mathematical difficulty. Stronger automation does not remove the regime: five standard tactics close 3 of the 39 states, and only one of those is a state that no interface solved. 10 Implemented interfaces are bundles. Typed repair, local patching, and rewriting differ in several linked ways: action schema, output granularity, preservation of untouched source, and how target immutability is enforced. A patch reply may contain several search-and-replace blocks; a typed turn applies exactly one operation. Equal step budgets therefore do not mean equal numbers of small edits; the token and cost comparisons include this difference and do not isolate it. The experiment compares these complete interfaces. It does not isolate a causal effect of typing alone, although the local-patch arm separates locality from complete regeneration more directly than a rewrite-only comparison. 

Tool vocabulary and training. The ten operations are one practical vocabulary, not a proof that no better granularity exists. The evaluated models were not trained to use it. Several mathematical repairs can be expressed by multiple action sequences, so future training should allow multiple valid routes and use rejected-action reasons as additional supervision. 

Benchmark provenance. Targets come from miniF2F and may have appeared in model training data. Correct blueprints and injected defects are author-constructed and reviewed with mechanical Lean checks, but there is no second independent annotator. B LUEPRINT TRACE is a controlled diagnostic benchmark, not a sample of failures from a real generation pipeline. The results say where typed edits work well (on mostly-correct blueprints with localized defects), not that typed edits win on arbitrary blueprint failures. 

# References 

Manish Acharya, Zhenyu Liao, Yueke Zhang, Kevin Leach, Yu Huang, and Yifan Zhang. 2026. VERITAS: Verifier-guided proof search for zero-shot formal theorem proving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.19399 .Pawan Sasanka Ammanamanchi, Siddharth Bhat, and Stella Biderman. 2026. Faults in our formal benchmarking: Dataset defects and evaluation failures in Lean theorem proving. In Proceedings of the 43rd International Conference on Machine Learning . https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.29493 .Jui-Hui Chung, Ziyang Cai, Zihao Li, Qishuo Yin, Rohit Agarwal, Simon Park, Rodrigo Porto, Narutatsu Ri, Ziran Yang, Shange Tang, et al. 2026. Goedel-Architect: Streamlining formal theorem proving with blueprint generation and refinement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.06468 .Leonardo de Moura and Sebastian Ullrich. 2021. The Lean 4 theorem prover and programming language. In Automated Deduction – CADE 28 , volume 12699 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 625–635. Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79876-5_37 .DeepSeek-AI. 2026a. DeepSeek-V4: Towards highly efficient million-token context intelligence. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.19348 .DeepSeek-AI. 2026b. DeepSeek-V4-Flash model card. https://huggingface.co/deepseek-ai/ DeepSeek-V4-Flash .Emily First, Markus N. Rabe, Talia Ringer, and Yuriy Brun. 2023. Baldur: Whole-proof generation and repair with large language models. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM Joint European Software 

11 Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering , pages 1229–1241. Minsu Kim and Se-Young Yun. 2026. Process-verified reinforcement learning for theorem proving via Lean. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.20068 .Po-Nien Kung, Linfeng Song, Dawsen Hwang, Jinsung Yoon, Chun-Liang Li, Simone Severini, Mirek Olšák, Edward Lockhart, Quoc V. Le, Burak Gokturk, et al. 2026. LEAP: Supercharging LLMs for formal mathematics with agentic frameworks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.03303 .David Ma, Kaijing Ma, Shawn Guo, Yunfeng Shi, Enduo Zhao, Jiajun Shi, Zhaoxiang Zhang, Gavin Cheung, Jiaheng Liu, and Zili Wang. 2026. OProver: A unified framework for agentic formal theorem proving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.17283 .Azim Ospanov, Farzan Farnia, and Roozbeh Yousefzadeh. 2025. APOLLO: Automated LLM and Lean collaboration for advanced formal reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.05758 .Qwen Team. 2026. Qwen3.6-Flash model card. https://www.qwencloud.com/models/qwen3. 6-flash .Z. Z. Ren, Zhihong Shao, Junxiao Song, Huajian Xin, Haocheng Wang, Wanjia Zhao, Liyue Zhang, Zhe Fu, Qihao Zhu, Dejian Yang, et al. 2025. DeepSeek-Prover-V2: Advancing formal mathematical reasoning via reinforcement learning for subgoal decomposition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.21801 .Talia Ringer, RanDair Porter, Nathaniel Yazdani, John Leo, and Dan Grossman. 2021. Proof repair across type equivalences. In Proceedings of the 42nd ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation , pages 112–127. Kári Rögnvaldsson, Chenhao Sun, Jasper Dekoninck, and Martin Vechev. 2026. Optimizing the cost-quality tradeoff of agentic theorem provers in Lean. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.04883 .Zeynel A. Ulu¸ san, Burak S. Akbudak, Can S. Erer, and Gözde Gül ¸ Sahin. 2026. FormalRewardBench: A benchmark for formal theorem proving reward models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.10141 .Evan Wang, Simon Chess, Daniel Lee, Siyuan Ge, Ajit Mallavarapu, Jarod Alper, and Vasily Ilin. 2026. Learning to repair Lean proofs from compiler feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.02990 .Zikai Xiao, Hanzheng Wang, Meng-Hao Guo, Shi-min Hu, and Shing-Tung Yau. 2026. Editable proof sketch for automated theorem proving. In Proceedings of the 43rd International Conference on Machine Learning .Kaiyu Yang, Aidan M. Swope, Alex Gu, Rahul Chalamala, Peiyang Song, Shixing Yu, Saad Godil, Ryan Prenger, and Anima Anandkumar. 2023. LeanDojo: Theorem proving with retrieval-augmented language models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Datasets and Benchmarks Track .Ning Zhang, Nongyu Di, Zenan Li, Yuan Yao, and Xiaoxing Ma. 2026a. Planning to hammer: Difficulty-aware decomposition for automating Rocq proofs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.17981 .12 Yuanhe Zhang, Yuekai Sun, Taiji Suzuki, Jason D. Lee, and Fanghui Liu. 2026b. LeanMarathon: Toward reliable AI co-mathematicians through long-horizon Lean autoformalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.05400 .Kunhao Zheng, Jesse Michael Han, and Stanislas Polu. 2022. miniF2F: A cross-system benchmark for formal Olympiad-level mathematics. In International Conference on Learning Representations .Thomas Zhu, Pietro Monticone, Jeremy Avigad, and Sean Welleck. 2026. LeanArchitect: Automating blueprint generation for humans and AI. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.22554 .13 Appendices A A representative split-node repair 

A.1 Splitting a hard induction node 

State p40 asks to prove that, for every natural number n,

12 | 4n+1 + 20 .

The failed blueprint contains this fact as one monolithic, unproved target node. The fixed node prover does not close it, although the statement is correct. The model therefore calls split_node and turns the single node into a small induction blueprint. 

before        

> target :∀n:N,12 |4n+1 + 20
> correct, but unproved

after split_node               

> base_case
> 12 |40+1 + 20
> step
> 12 |4n+1 + 20
> ⇒12 |4n+2 + 20
> target : proof by induction base ←base_case , step ←step

Figure 4: The p40 repair. A monolithic induction goal is replaced by a base case and an induction step. 

The split is structurally correct, but the induction step still needs a proof. The complete five-call trajectory is: 

Step Operation Lean feedback / result 

1 split_node refused before anything is applied: the proposed proof uses 

native_decide 

2 split_node applied; base_case closes at once, and the proof offered for step 

does not elaborate 3 rewrite_node_statement 

on step 

applied; a second proof for the same statement, still not elaborating 4 set_node_proof on step step proved by omega 

5 set_node_proof on the target the target closes by induction; the state is solved 

This example shows that typed repair is not limited to deleting or rewiring nodes: split_node 

can introduce a useful proof decomposition, after which local proof edits complete it. The refused first call is ordinary rather than exceptional: the screen that protects the target statement also rejects forbidden proof constructs before a candidate reaches Lean. 14 B Acceptance and benchmark details 

B.1 Graph-aware terminal acceptance 

For the target closure C defined in Section 2, the harness accepts an assembled module only if all of the following checks pass: 1. The complete module elaborates in a fresh Lean process without an error or timeout. 2. No blueprint node matches a stored kernel refutation certificate. 3. Every node in C is proved; proofs produced by the fixed node prover are spliced into the module and the assembled module is elaborated again. 4. The target statement hash equals the original and its axiom certificate contains no sorryAx ,

native_decide , or nonstandard axiom. 5. For every node with a real proof, Actual( v) ⊆ Declared( v). The extractor follows non-blueprint constants and stops at blueprint declarations. Conditions 1, 2, and 5 range over the whole module. Only proof completion is restricted to C, so a disconnected deferred node does not make the target proof invalid; strict all-node completion is reported separately. Condition 5 is an inclusion, not an equality: a repaired proof may stop using an edge that stays harmlessly declared. With DeepSeek-V4-Flash such edges remain on 10 typed, 28 patch and 6

rewrite results. On the typed side these are 12 edges, and 8 of them belong to nodes closed by the fixed node prover rather than to proofs the model wrote. We report unused edges as a quality measure and require only that no dependency stays hidden. 

B.2 Stronger automation 

The fixed node prover tries rfl , then simp , then omega , with 200 ,000 heartbeats for each tier; six states also declare norm_num as a fourth tier. On the 39 proof-authoring states we ran each of norm_num , ring , linarith , nlinarith , and aesop on its own at the same budget, counting only proofs the kernel accepts without extra axioms. Two states close with aesop and one with 

nlinarith ; the other three tactics close none. Six modules needed one added import for these tactics to be in scope at all. 

B.3 Outcomes by failure family 

Table 7 splits the controlled benchmark by injected family. A compound state carries more than one defect, so it is counted once, in its own row, and not inside the family of its first defect. Redundant dependencies, missing dependencies and false lemmas are solved by all three interfaces almost without exception. The states that no interface solves sit in two families: 15 of the 24 are monolithic nodes and 6 are missing hypotheses. 

B.4 Footprint of the accepted repairs 

The interfaces differ in what they leave behind, on the same DeepSeek-V4-Flash endpoints as Table 5. Every accepted result of every interface is complete in the strict sense: no node is left unfinished anywhere in the module, not only inside the target closure. Rewriting most often returns a blueprint holding the target statement alone, on 42 of 104 results; typed repair does so on 38 of 104 and 15 Table 7: Solved states by failure family, for DeepSeek-V4-Flash, on the same endpoints as Table 5. 

Family n Typed Patch Rewrite None 

false / too strong 18 17 16 18 0missing hypothesis 30 21 24 21 6missing dependency 15 15 15 15 0redundant dependency 14 14 14 14 0dead node 14 12 12 13 1monolithic 31 12 12 11 15 representation 8 4 6 2 2compound 12 9 10 10 0total 142 104 109 104 24 

patching on 14 of 109 . Patching leaves nodes outside the target closure on 26 results, typed repair on 

19 , and rewriting on 5. Patching also changes node statements most often: 62 changed statements against 16 for typed repair and 21 for rewriting. 

# C Experimental configuration 

All model calls go through OpenRouter. The matched run uses DeepSeek-V4-Flash build 

deepseek-v4-flash-20260423 (DeepSeek-AI, 2026b); the repeated run uses Qwen3.6-Flash (Qwen Team, 2026), model identifier qwen/qwen3.6-flash , served by a single endpoint (Alibaba). Neither run sends decoding parameters, so provider defaults apply. The maximum model output is 49 ,152 tokens in every arm. The three interfaces together cost $2.10 with DeepSeek-V4-Flash and $14.80 with Qwen3.6-Flash. The artifact pins the Lean/mathlib environment and records input, cached input, reasoning, and output tokens together with the provider pricing snapshot. 

C.1 The prompts as sent 

The three system prompts follow, verbatim, for state p02 ; across states only the namespace, the label prefix and the allowed imports differ. The typed arm also receives the ten operation schemas in the request’s function-calling field, contained in full in the artifact. 

Typed local edits.        

> You repair formal proof blueprints (Lean 4, LeanArchitect @[blueprint] attribute). A blueprint is a DAG of theorem nodes; the state below FAILED for the typed reasons given. You control the blueprint ONLY through the provided tools: each turn call EXACTLY ONE tool; the harness applies it mechanically to the Lean module, runs the Lean verifier and a deterministic node prover (rfl, simp, omega on deferred nodes), and returns typed feedback. Iterate until the target is proved or the budget runs out. Rules: - The target theorem 's statement is IMMUTABLE (its proof may change). - Proofs may be deferred with 'sorry '/'sorry_using [deps] ': the prover tries each deferred node and proved nodes are assembled automatically — a good architecture of simple deferred steps wins without written proofs. -'axiom ','admit ','native_decide 'are forbidden and rejected.

16 - A rejected tool call leaves the state unchanged but consumes budget; the error message explains why. - The graph in each tool result is the CURRENT state after your edit. Plan your edits from the typed statuses: statement_refuted means the node is kernel-refuted (drop or replace it); declaration_uses_sorry means the proof is deferred; no_proof_within_budget / budget_ladder_exhausted mean the prover failed on it as stated (split it or prove it yourself). 

Local patching. 

You repair formal proof blueprints (Lean 4 with the LeanArchitect @[blueprint] attribute). A blueprint is a DAG of theorem nodes; the state below FAILED for the typed reasons given. You edit the CURRENT Lean module source directly with exact search/replace patches. Each turn reply with ONE patch attempt: one or more blocks in EXACTLY this format (only the blocks are interpreted): <<<<<<< SEARCH (text that occurs in the current module source) ======= (replacement text) >>>>>>> REPLACE Patch semantics (mechanical, checked before evaluation): - SEARCH must be non-empty and must match the current module source EXACTLY ONCE, character for character, whitespace and line breaks included. To insert, anchor on neighboring existing text and repeat it in the replacement; to delete, leave the replacement side empty. - Blocks apply in reply order, each against the text produced by the previous block. The patch is ATOMIC: the first failing block rejects the whole attempt and the module stays unchanged. A rejected attempt still consumes budget; the error message explains why. - After a patch applies, the harness validates the module, elaborates it with the Lean verifier, runs the deterministic node prover on deferred nodes, and returns typed feedback plus the UPDATED module source. Write every SEARCH against the LATEST module source shown to you. Rules: - The target theorem 's statement (binders and result type) must be preserved EXACTLY; a patch whose result changes it is rejected after application. - 'axiom ', 'admit ', 'native_decide ' are forbidden and rejected. - The module must keep `namespace P02Bad ` ... `end P02Bad `, its imports within: Architect, Mathlib.Tactic.Ring, Mathlib.Tactic.Linarith, Mathlib.Tactic.NormNum, and every declaration a theorem carrying an @[blueprint "p02bad-..."] annotation; node-to-node dependencies are declared with (proofUses := [name1, name2]) on the USING node. - Proofs may be deferred: use `:= by\n sorry ` for a lone node or `:= by\n sorry_using [dep1, dep2] ` when the planned proof will use those blueprint nodes. A deterministic prover (rfl, then simp, then omega; 200000 heartbeats each) will attempt every deferred node, and proved nodes are assembled automatically — a good architecture of simple deferred steps can win without any written proof. Worked example (form only; the content is yours): <<<<<<< SEARCH theorem step_one (n : Nat) : n = n := by sorry ======= theorem step_one (n : Nat) : n = n := by rfl >>>>>>> REPLACE Iterate until the target is proved or the budget runs out. 

17 Whole-module rewriting. 

You repair formal proof blueprints (Lean 4 with the LeanArchitect @[blueprint] attribute). A blueprint is a DAG of theorem nodes; the state below FAILED for the typed reasons given. Propose a COMPLETE REPLACEMENT blueprint for the same target: any architecture you want (any number of support lemmas and dependencies), as long as the target theorem statement is preserved exactly. You will iterate: after each attempt the harness elaborates your module with the Lean verifier, runs the deterministic node prover (rfl, simp, omega) on deferred nodes, and returns feedback. Reply to feedback with the COMPLETE corrected module (one lean fence, full contract), not a description. Output contract (mechanical, checked before evaluation): - Reply with EXACTLY ONE fenced code block labeled lean containing a complete Lean 4 module; no other code blocks. - The module imports must be a subset of: Architect, Mathlib.Tactic.Ring, Mathlib.Tactic.Linarith, Mathlib.Tactic.NormNum. - The module must declare `namespace P02Bad ` and `end P02Bad `.- Every blueprint node is a theorem carrying the attribute @[blueprint "<label>" (latexEnv := "lemma")] for support lemmas or @[blueprint "<label>"] for the target theorem, where every <label> starts with "p02bad-" (for example "p02bad-target"). - Declare node-to-node dependencies in the attribute with (proofUses := [name1, name2]) on the USING node; dependencies not declared there are invisible to the graph. - The target theorem 's statement text (binders and result type) must be preserved EXACTLY as given; changing it invalidates the candidate. - Proofs may be deferred: use `:= by\n sorry ` for a lone node or `:= by\n sorry_using [dep1, dep2] ` when the planned proof will use those blueprint nodes. A deterministic prover (rfl, then simp, then omega; 200000 heartbeats each) will attempt every deferred node, and proved nodes are assembled automatically — a good architecture of simple deferred steps can win without any written proof. - You may also write complete proofs using core Lean lemmas and the allowed imports. Follow this reply template EXACTLY (structure and syntax; content is yours; the fence label is `lean `, and `import Architect ` must be the first import — the blueprint attribute lives there): action: <action name> 

``` lean import Architect namespace P02Bad @[blueprint "p02bad-step-one" (latexEnv := "lemma")] theorem step_one (n : Nat) : n = n := by sorry @[blueprint "p02bad-target" (proofUses := [step_one])] theorem target_name (n : Nat) : n = n := by sorry_using [step_one] end P02Bad 

``` 

18 D Recorded trace fields 

Each B LUEPRINT TRACE episode records the protocol configuration; initial state and target signature; canonical source, node statements, statuses, and edges at every step; the typed call, patch blocks, or rewritten module; whether the action was applied and its source/graph difference; Lean, node-prover, and graph-scan feedback; every rejection reason; token and cost usage; and the final outcome. Controlled states also include source-target provenance, construction metadata, and an available correct source blueprint or defect manifest; the ten function schemas ship as one machine-readable file. 19