Title: Verification Modulo Tested Library Contracts

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.15533v1

Published Time: Mon, 20 Apr 2026 00:13:44 GMT

Number of Pages: 38

Markdown Content:
# Verification Modulo Tested Library Contracts 

ABHISHEK UPPAR, Indian Institute of Science, India 

OMAR MUHAMMAD, Indian Institute of Science, India 

SUMANTH PRABHU S, Relyance AI, India 

DEEPAK D’SOUZA, Indian Institute of Science, India 

P. MADHUSUDAN, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Department of Computer Science, USA 

ADITHYA MURALI, University of Wisconsin, USA We consider the problem of verification modulo tested library contracts as a step towards automating the verification of client programs that use complex libraries. We formulate this problem as the synthesis of modular contracts for the library methods used by the client that are adequate to prove the client correct, and that also pass the scrutiny of a testing engine that tests the library against these contracts. We also consider a new form of method contracts called contextual contracts that arise in this setting that hold in the context of the client program, and can often be simpler and easier to infer than classical modular contracts. We provide a counterexample-guided learning framework to solve this problem, in which the synthesizer interacts with a constraint solver as well as the testing engine in order to infer adequate modular/contextual method contracts and inductive invariants for the client. The main synthesis engines we use are generalizing CHC solvers that are realized using ICE learning algorithms. We realize this framework in a tool called Dualis and show its efficacy on benchmarks where clients call large libraries. 

1 Introduction 

Formal verification mechanisms have made great strides in the last few decades, resulting in mature logics, verification paradigms, automation using logic engines, and tool frameworks. However, for expressive specifications of large programs, complete automation is not within reach. Effective verification methods for large software today call for human-written annotations, such as contracts, that enable modular and hence scalable verification. Furthermore, human annotations in terms of inductive invariants for iterative blocks of code are needed to enable scalable automation using logic solvers. While there are techniques for synthesizing inductive invariants and contracts [ 15 , 16 , 28 , 29 ,34 , 45 ], inductive invariant synthesis is a hard search problem, and current synthesis techniques do not scale. We are at an impasse today as it has become clear that completely automated verification is unlikely to scale to large code and complex specifications. Automated verification, however, does work well for smaller pieces of code with complex specifications, or large code bases with simple specifications (e.g., null pointer dereference checking, data races, etc.). In this paper, we explore a more pragmatic choice in the design space—relaxing verification guarantees in order to achieve scalable and complete automation for larger code-bases. In particular, we are interested in automatically verifying smaller client programs that utilize large libraries. A traditional verification approach would require annotating the libraries with contracts strong enough to prove the client code, and then proving the client code and the libraries against their contracts using further annotations (such as inductive loop invariants). Annotating and proving large libraries against their contracts is a daunting task; however, in many settings, the client code is smaller, and we can automate the synthesis of annotations using current techniques. We negotiate this space by relaxing the guarantee of formal verification of libraries in order to scale verification. More precisely, our aim is to automatically synthesize contracts for libraries, 

formally prove that the client is correct assuming these contracts, and, instead of formally verifying the library code, demand that the library pass extensive testing against the contracts. We propose the following novel verification modulo tested library contracts problem: Given a client program 𝐶 using a library 𝐿 , find a set of formal contracts Π for the methods in 𝐿 such that (a) the client 𝐶 is proved correct assuming the contracts Π for 𝐿 , and (b) a given deterministic 

> 1
> arXiv:2604.15533v1 [cs.PL] 16 Apr 2026 Abhishek Uppar, Omar Muhammad, Sumanth Prabhu S, Deepak D’Souza, P. Madhusudan, and Adithya Murali

test-generator with a bound on its resources is unable to find any tests for the library methods that violate their contract in Π.Though the precise problem we define here seems new, there have been several variants of the above problem in recent years that have considered synthesizing contracts for libraries aided by testing only (and not verification)—for functional programs (albeit without synthesizing inductive invariants for clients) [ 48 ] and for synthesizing preconditions and contracts purely from libraries [ 4 ,5] (see related work in Section 8 for more details). In this paper, we seek entirely automated methods that solve the stated problem, both in terms of synthesizing contracts for libraries as well as synthesizing the inductive annotations for the client that prove it correct. Furthermore, we are interested in the setting of imperative object-oriented programming languages, where we assume libraries implement classes that encapsulate data and the methods, where classes manage unbounded collections of objects (like container classes implemented using data structures), and classes and objects have state that evolves with method calls. 

Learning Library Contracts and Client Invariants Simultaneously . The key problem to solve is one of synthesis—synthesizing contracts Π for the libraries as well as synthesizing annotations for the client code (inductive loop invariants, contracts for client’s methods, etc.) such that a logic engine can validate the verification conditions for the basic blocks in the client code, and at the same time ensure the library contracts are vetted correct by the given test generator. The first main technical contribution of this paper is a learning framework that simultaneously synthesizes adequate contracts for libraries and inductive annotations for client code to solve the above problem. We propose a counterexample guided learning/synthesis framework. In each round, we require the verifier to handle a set of CHC (Constrained Horn Clause) constraints derived from the client, 𝐶𝐻𝐶 (𝐶 ), along with a set of positive samples for library methods. Intuitively, we require the verification engine to solve the CHC constraints of the client in a way that the predicates associated with library contracts in the CHC include the positive samples. (These positive samples can also be encoded into CHC constraints, of course; but the crucial aspect is that these positive examples evolve during the verification process). In each round, we require that the verification engine solves the CHC constraints (thereby finding inductive annotations for the client and contracts for the library methods) while ensuring that the contracts for the library methods include the positive samples. It is important to our framework that the CHC solver generalize as well (a generic CHC solver does not suffice). A CHC solver that overfits the contracts (say allowing only the given positive examples to be the library’s contract) will not be useful in our context— the problem is not to solve the CHCs but to simultaneously generalize the library contracts and solve the CHCs. Our framework pairs a generalizing solver for CHCs and positive samples with a test generator, working in rounds. In each round, we take the CHC solver proposed annotations, and check if the testing engine can find violations of the library against their synthesized contracts. If the testing engine is able to produce failing tests, we extract positive examples that show violation of the contract, augment the set of positive samples, and iterate. If the testing engine is unable to falsify the contracts, we can terminate, as we have verified the client modulo tested library contracts. Turning to realizing generalizing solvers for CHCs and positive examples, we propose ICE-learning engines [ 12 , 16 , 17 ] as natural candidates. ICE-learning engines strive to solve CHCs by learning inductive invariants and annotations in hypothesis classes, aiming to find simplest expressions that solve CHC constraints, and thus naturally generalize. Given CHC constraints, an ICE solver works itself in an iterative loop involving an ICE learner and a constraint solver. The ICE learner, in each iteration proposes inductive invariants that solve the CHCs, and the 

> 2Verification Modulo Tested Library Contracts

constraint solver responds using positive, negative, and implication counterexamples (ICE samples) when validity fails. Consequently, the positive examples generated by testing engines (in the outer loop) naturally fit into an ICE-learning framework as we can add them to the set of ICE samples the learner considers in each round. The learning algorithm required in our framework can be any ICE-learning algorithm that synthesizes invariants and contracts given counterexamples. Moreover, when the hypotheses spaces of invariants and contracts is finite, our framework is guaranteed to converge and verify the client modulo tested library contracts, provided they exist. 

Contextual contracts . The second contribution of this paper is the study of a new form of contracts that emerges particularly in the setting of verification modulo tested libraries. Consider a client 𝐶 and a library 𝐿 that it utilizes. In traditional verification, contracts Π for 𝐿 are valid if the methods in 𝐿 verify their contract when they are called in all possible states and all possible inputs . However, since we are interested in verification primarily of the client, it is sufficient if 

𝐿 satisfies the contracts Π, in the context of the client 𝐶 . More precisely, the library is not called in every possible state of object heap and input parameters—the client only calls it in particular states. Hence, there is an implicit precondition that the overall program satisfies when calling library functions. Under these preconditions, the contracts for the libraries could be made stronger, which in turn can help prove the client correct. We call these contracts that hold in the context of the client contextual contracts .For example, consider a library that has a class that maintains a datastructure for a set, with methods to insert and delete elements, and a method to check membership. Now consider a client 

𝐶 that only inserts positive integers into a set maintained by such a datatype, and then checks for membership of a negative number, and asserts that this must return false. In this case, a contextual contract for the membership method could state that it returns false for all negative numbers. Note that this contract holds in the context of this client as the client only adds positive integers to the container (and proves the assertion in the client correct), but does not hold in general. 1

We propose the following verification modulo tested contextual library contracts problem: given a client program 𝐶 using a library 𝐿 , find a set of formal contracts Π for the library methods in 𝐿 at each call site in 𝐶 such that (a) the client 𝐶 is proved correct assuming the contracts Π for 𝐿 , and (b) a predetermined test-generator with fixed resources is unable to find any tests for the program with the client and the library methods that violate the contracts in Π.Our framework can cater to synthesizing contextual contracts by testing the contracts only in the context of the client . We modify our framework so that the testing phase is performed not modularly on the library, but on the entire program, involving the client and the library. 

Learning Algorithms: Search, Contraint-solving and LLMs . As mentioned earlier, our frame-work allows the use of any ICE learning algorithm, and we use a decision-tree learning called HornICE [12]. We can also use large language models (LLMs) in this context as ICE-learners. Note that we do not assume LLMs to produce reliable annotations as we will always validate them (using formal verification and testing). Given a client program, and only a description of the library, we can utilize LLMs to propose contracts (and invariants for the client). When proposals are found to be incorrect (either in verification of the client or testing of libraries), we can feed the counterexamples back to the LLM and ask it to modify its proposal, turning it into an ICE learner. While, of course, there are no guarantees that proposals would avoid the counterexamples or converge, the LLM can speculate on contracts using the documentation, code, and semantics of natural language. For example, an 

> 1A contract that holds in all settings and proves the client correct does exist but is much more complex—we would need preconditions that say that any number inserted into the set is positive, keep a class invariant that all elements stored in the set are positive (which will require quantification or recursive definitions). 3Abhishek Uppar, Omar Muhammad, Sumanth Prabhu S, Deepak D’Souza, P. Madhusudan, and Adithya Murali

LLM easily predicts that isEmpty() should return false after calling insert() in a container class, even with no access to library code. We also develop algorithms that combine LLMs with symbolic methods. In particular, we propose an ICE-learning algorithm that extracts predicates from the LLM proposed contracts to use in a symbolic learning algorithm to synthesize contracts that truly avoid counterexamples. 

Limitations . Note that VMTLC with modular/contextual contracts can, of course, succeed on incorrect programs, as library contracts are not verified, but only tested. In order to succeed, spurious contracts would needed to be synthesized that pass testing, and inductive invariants for the client found that prove the client under these library contracts. While modular contracts are tested extensively in all possible contexts, contextual contracts are tested only in the context of the client, and hence are more susceptible to being spurious. See Section 4.1 for a detailed discussion. 

Evaluation . To evaluate our framework, we build a tool called Dualis that implements our framework for verifying clients modulo tested library contracts. Our tool combines verification engines that return counterexamples, test generators, and a variety of ICE learners. We evaluate our proposed techniques on a suite of benchmarks drawn from open-source data structure libraries, most beyond the power of automated verification today. We evaluate (a) the efficacy of our framework in solving the VMTLC problem, for several choices of generalizing CHC solvers, including LLMs (b) comparison of modular and contextual contracts, (c) whether synthesized contracts by the various approaches are indeed valid, and (d) ablations that study the effectiveness of generalizing CHC solvers and nongeneralizing ones. Our evaluation shows that our framework is effective on verifying clients modulo synthesized library contracts, and holds promise to scale verification. 

2 Illustrative Example 

In this section we illustrate the VMTLC problem via an example. Consider the client program shown in Fig. 1(a). The program uses a Set library to maintain a set of integers. It inserts a number of non-negative integers into the set, and then removes them from the set while computing the sum of their values. The programmer asserts that sum variable contains a non-negative value at the end of the program. We would like to establish that the assertion is valid. In addition to the insert , remove , empty (and the implicit init constructor) methods, let us say the Set library has a couple of “observer” methods size () and min () that take no arguments and return integer values. We will also consider the method empty () to be an observer. The observer methods size and min are meant to return the size and the minimum value stored in the set, respectively, but our technique is agnostic to these semantics. We associate uninterpreted functions 

empty (of type Set → Bool ), and size and min (of type Set → Int ) with the observer methods, to abstractly represent the state of the data structure maintained by the library. Our goal is now to come up with annotations for the client program in the form of loop invariants and method contracts, which constitute a valid Floyd-Hoare proof that the program satisfies its assertion. There are a couple of caveats though. Firstly, the library method contracts must make use of only the observer functions (instead of the actual data structure state maintained by the library), apart from the formal parameters and return values of the method. The method contracts may also refer to the auxiliary state after the invocation of the method, using primed versions of the observer functions. For example, the contract for insert could be a predicate over the variables 

o (representing the receiver object on which the method is invoked), empty (o), size (o), min (o),

empty ′ (o), size ′ (o), and min ′ (o) (representing the values returned by the observer functions in the state pre and post the method invocation), and ival (the formal parameter to insert ). The loop invariant inv1 for the for-loop would be a predicate over the variables 𝑁 , 𝑖 and S (variables in scope                                                                                                        

> 4Verification Modulo Tested Library Contracts
> 1i n t main ( ) {2S e t S ; 3i n t N = nondet ( ) ; 4f o r (i n t i=0 ; i< N ; i ++) {5i n t v1 =nondet ( ) ; 6i f ( v1 >= 0 ) 7S . i n s e r t ( v1 ) ; 8}9i n t sum =0 ; 10 while ( ! S . empty ( ) ) {11 i n t v2 =S . remove ( ) ; 12 sum =sum +v2 ; 13 }14 a s s e r t ( sum >= 0 ) ; 15 }
> void i n i t ( S e t t ) ; // Contract: empty ′(o)
> void i n s e r t ( S e t t , i n t i v a l ) ; // Contract: (( empty (o) ∨ min (o) ≥ 0) ∧ ival ≥
> 0)) ⇒ min ′(o) ≥ 0
> bool empty ( S e t t ) ; // Contract: ret ≡empty (o) ∧ empty ′(o)≡
> empty (o)
> i n t remove ( S e t t ) ; // Contract: (¬ empty (o) ∧ min (o) ≥ 0) ⇒ ( ret ≥
> 0) ∧ ( empty ′(o) ∨ min ′(o) ≥ 0)
> // Loop invariants:
> inv1 :empty (S) ∨ min (S) ≥ 0
> inv2 :sum ≥0∧ ( empty (S) ∨ min (S) ≥ 0)
> (a) (b) Fig. 1. (a) A client program that uses a Set library, and (b) Library methods along with contracts, and loop invariants, learnt by our approach.

at the loop head), and likewise the loop invariant inv2 for the while-loop would be a predicate over 

𝑁 , S, and sum . The second caveat is that the method contracts need only pass the given tester—they need not be formally proved. For this program, the approach we describe in this paper essentially comes up with the adequate testable annotations (library method contracts and loop invariants) shown in Fig. 1(b). Here ret 

represents the return value of the methods empty and remove . The annotations are adequate to prove the assertion in the client, as well as pass the Tester. Finally, to illustrate the use of contextual contracts, consider the same client program of Fig. 1(a), but where the library does not provide the min observer method. There is clearly no adequate testable modular contract for the library methods using these observer methods. However, what we 

can say is that, in the context of the given client program, the call to remove () at Line 11 satisfies the contract “ empty (o) ∨ ret ≥ 0”. This contextual contract can be tested by the Tester by simply executing the client program with different inputs and checking whether the call to remove () at Line 11 satisfies this contract. Our approach comes up with this contract and the other annotations below: 

init (Line 2) ↦ → empty ′ (o) empty (Line 10) ↦ → ret ≡ empty (o) ∧ empty ′ (o) ≡ empty (o),

insert (Line 7) ↦ → true remove (Line 11) ↦ → empty (o) ∨ ret ≥ 0

inv1 ↦ → true inv2 ↦ → sum ≥ 0

which turns out to be adequate to prove the assertion in the client, and also pass the contextual Tester. 

3 The Verification Modulo Tested Library Contracts Problem 

In this section we formally define the main technical objects of study, namely the verification modulo tested library contracts (VMTLC) problem and the concept of contextual contracts. We begin with some preliminaries to develop the vocabulary for our definitions. 

> 5Abhishek Uppar, Omar Muhammad, Sumanth Prabhu S, Deepak D’Souza, P. Madhusudan, and Adithya Murali

Classes and Objects . In this work we study the VMTLC problem in the domain of object-oriented programs. We work with a client program 𝐶 (with a main method) that creates and manipulates objects of classes that are part of a library. Let us consider a set of primitive sorts (mainly integers and Booleans in this paper). We model a class 𝑐 using a designated sort 𝑂 𝑐 for objects of that class. We will use these to explicitly model manipulation of objects by methods. A class 𝑐 consists of a set of methods {𝑓 cons (𝑝 cons ), 𝑓 1 (𝑜, 𝑝 1), . . . , 𝑓 𝑛 (𝑜, 𝑝 𝑛 )} , where 𝑓 cons is a constructor method to create objects, and 𝑓 1, . . . , 𝑓 𝑛 are methods on receiver object 𝑜 given as the first parameter (a method call o.f(p) is modeled as calling 𝑓 (𝑜, 𝑝 )). These methods in general have side effects, and return a reference to an object in 𝑂 𝑐 as well as a return value in a primitive sort. We don’t formalize programming languages further as our problems are meant to work on real programming languages; we assume that they come with a sound verification condition generator for verifying programs with adequate annotations, and a test generator for testing programs against annotations. 

Observer Methods and Annotations . We now define the syntax and semantics for annotations (both invariants and contracts) that we consider in this work. Let us fix a first-order signature consisting of a set of sorts S as well as a set of relation symbols 

R and function symbols (includes constant symbols) F . Function and relation symbols are also equipped with a signature in the usual way: a function 𝑓 has a signature of the form (𝜏 1 × 𝜏 2 ×· · · × 𝜏 𝑛 ) → 𝜏 where 𝑛 is its arity and 𝜏 𝑖 , 𝜏 ∈ S , and a relation symbol 𝑟 has a signature of the form 

𝜂 1 × 𝜂 2 × · · · × 𝜂 𝑚 where 𝑚 is its arity and 𝜂 𝑖 ∈ S .Our annotations use a set of observer methods corresponding to a class which are pure, side-effect-free, terminating functions on objects. These do not change the state of the class or of the object, and are used to measure properties of an object. For example, in a stack class, a method that returns the element stored on the top of the stack (without popping it) would be an observer method. Another example is a method that returns the size of the stack. Observer methods can be used to write rich annotations/specifications. For example, we could say that after popping an element, the size of a stack object reduces by 1 (formally size ′ (𝑜 ) = size (𝑜 ) − 1). Note that we treat the receiver object as the first parameter for the method, and use primes to denote the value of the observer method computed in the post-state 2.The annotations we consider are formulas in multi-sorted first-order logic over the above vocabulary. We require well-formed formulas to only use primed observer methods on primed objects, i.e., one cannot evaluate an observer method that computes over the heap in the post-state on an object from the pre-state. We will typically focus on using quantifier-free formulas. Invariants for the client program are written not only using (as free variables) the variables in scope, but also using observer methods applied to object variables in scope, and combinations using the FO logic over the primitive types. The syntax for contracts is more involved. Rather than have preconditions and postconditions for methods, we write contracts as postconditions that can relate pre- and post-states (in particular, postconditions that hold upon certain preconditions holding can be expressed as pre ⇒ post ). Contracts for a library method 𝑚 are logical formulas involving (a) the receiver object variable 𝑜 , (b) the formal parameters 𝑝 for 𝑚 (which could involve objects), and (d) a variable ret for the returned value. Contracts can use both primed and unprimed versions of observer methods. For example, a contract for insert (𝑜, 𝑘 ) into a container object 𝑜 , can be (size ′ (𝑜 ) = size (𝑜 ) + 1) ∧ contains ′ (𝑜, 𝑘 )

where size and contains are observer methods. In our problem definitions and evaluation, we fix particular precise logics for annotations. We model exceptions as special sentinel values to denote 

> 2The reason observer methods can be primed is because their computation depends on the heap. When the heap is modified, the observer methods become logically distinct from what they were before the modification. This is a common modeling choice in verification involving defined functions over heaps. 6Verification Modulo Tested Library Contracts

error states and evaluate formulas over an error-aware semantics. This is similar to modeling exceptions using Option -type return values. Observe here that invariants for the client can involve the client’s local variables, but may also need to talk about the state of the object heap even though it is only accessible through the library methods. The observer methods mediate this interface and provide a vocabulary that the client can use to state invariants. Correspondingly the library methods must provide contracts in the same vocabulary. For a formal treatment of modular annotations in OOP, see [3]. We denote formulas with free variables 𝑝 and that use observer methods 𝑜𝑏𝑠 as 𝜑 [obs ] ( 𝑝 ), and when the observer methods are clear from context, as simply 𝜑 (𝑝 ).

Object-Oriented Programs and Verification Conditions . We consider an object-oriented client program 𝑃 that utilizes a set of classes C and set of library methods L = {𝐿 1, . . . , 𝐿 𝑚 }. We assume that 𝑃 has a set of methods including a main method 𝑀 (we call this part of the program the client 

𝐶 ), apart from the library methods L. Our client programs can perform the usual computations associated with objects, including creating new objects using constructors, and manipulate objects using method calls of the class, with conditionals, iterations, and function calls to internal auxiliary methods. We also assume that the library methods do not call the client code. Importantly, our client programs contain assertions . The verification problem we are interested in involves showing that these assertions are valid assuming certain contracts for the library methods. We capture this aspect of the problem by modeling the validity of the assertions with respect to contracts as the validity of a verification condition (VC) 𝜑 in our logic described above. The VC 𝜑 is stated over a set of free variables 𝑣 (modeling versioned variables for capturing basic blocks) as well as formula meta-variables I = {𝐼 1, 𝐼 2, . . . , 𝐼 𝑛 } and A = {𝐴 1, 𝐴 2, . . . , 𝐴 𝑚 } corresponding to the invariants for the client code and the contracts for the library methods, respectively. We refer to client invariants in a broad sense, to include loop invariants and auxiliary method contracts. The signature and vocabulary of the invariants and the library contracts are as described above. We note that using contracts that refer to observer methods/pure functions is standard. Assertion frameworks established in the literature for Object-Oriented Languages like JML [ 22 , 31 ] and Spec#/Code Contracts [ 32 ] allow contracts using observer methods. In OO languages, encapsulation naturally demands using observers to observe the internal state of objects. When proving the client correct, we can model observer methods as fields of objects that are kept up to date across methods. Formally, we model them as uninterpreted functions that get updated according to contracts. Multiple objects do not pose any issue, and the modeling works in general. However, we acknowledge that in cases where clients and library methods make changes to a 

shared pointer-based heap (not common in OO programming), our current contract language needs to be more expressive in order to be effective (e.g., include modifies sets to facilitate frame reasoning, etc.) Although there is nothing that precludes our framework from handling such contracts, we do not utilize them in this work as we study applications that embrace encapsulation. We leave synthesizing such richer contracts clauses to future work. We denote the VC with its parameters by 𝜑 (𝑣, I, A) . The verification objective with respect to the client is to synthesize formulas for the predicates in I ∪ A (with the appropriate signature and in the logic) such that the VC is valid. 3.

Test Generators . We use test generators to validate contracts for the library methods with respect to the library implementation. We model a test generator formally as a deterministic terminating oracle 𝑇 (𝑃, mode , 𝑁 , eA; RB ) that takes in a program 𝑃 in the form of a client program          

> 3Verification conditions can be typically expressed as Constrained Horn Clauses [20 ,33 ], and we will assume this form in our techniques. However, note that the observer methods in 𝜑 are not to be synthesized, which is not formally allowed in traditional formulations of CHCs. We show how we handle this when using CHC solvers later (see Section 5.2) 7Abhishek Uppar, Omar Muhammad, Sumanth Prabhu S, Deepak D’Souza, P. Madhusudan, and Adithya Murali

𝐶 and library 𝐿 , a mode (“modular” or “contextual”), a library method 𝑁 , a set of contracts eA =

{ e𝐴 1 [𝑜𝑏𝑠, 𝑜𝑏𝑠 ′] ( 𝑥 1), . . . , e𝐴 𝑚 [𝑜𝑏𝑠, 𝑜𝑏𝑠 ′] ( 𝑥 𝑚 )} for the library methods with observer methods 𝑜𝑏𝑠 and free variables 𝑥 𝑖 over which the contracts are expressed, and a resource bound RB . We use RB 

to model forced termination since a testing strategy might go on forever. In practice, since test generators can be nondeterministic, we determinize them by fixing all random seeds. In the modular mode, the test generator does the following. It creates objects and manipulates them using methods, with invented parameters, to find valid objects, and generates test inputs for the method 𝑁 and executes the method. It looks for a violation of the contract for 𝑁 , by evaluating the terms in the contract, and substituting the values in the formula. Specifically, it interprets the variable o to be the receiver object, variables 𝑝 to be the values corresponding to the formal parameters, and ret to be the return value of the method. Importantly, it interprets the observer method symbols in 𝑜𝑏𝑠 to be the functions defined by the respective method definitions given in the code. It also executes unprimed methods in the pre-state and their primed versions in the post-state. It substitutes the computed values for all these terms in the contract for 𝑁 and evaluates whether the contract holds. If any of them do not hold, the test generator raises a contract violation. In the contextual mode, the test generator essentially executes the client program 𝐶 with different inputs it generates. Like in the modular case it checks for violations of the method contracts whenever a library method is invoked in the client, and raises violations accordingly. In both modes, the test generator can either return OK to say that it was not able to find a contract violation, or return a method name 𝑁 ′ along with a valuation of inputs to 𝑁 ′, its return value, and observer function outputs, that evidence the violation of the contract for the method. 

Problem Statement 

We are now ready to define the main problem of study for which we develop algorithms in Section 5. 

Definition 3.1 (Modular Contract Synthesis for Verification Modulo Tested Libraries). Fix classes 

C, library L, a program 𝑃 with both client code 𝐶 and library code, with verification condition 

𝜑 (𝑣, I, A) , test generator 𝑇 , and resource bound RB . Fix also the signatures of the client invariants 

I and method contracts A, as described above. Synthesize a set of formulas eI corresponding to client invariants I over the appropriate variables, as well as a set of contracts eA corresponding to the library contracts A over the appropriate variables such that: (1) the VC substituted with the definitions for the invariant and contract predicates is valid, i.e., 𝜑 (𝑣, eI, eA) is valid, and (2) the test generator 𝑇 (𝑃, modular , 𝑁 , eA; RB ) returns OK for each library method 𝑁 . □

A set of invariants eI and library contracts eA is said to verify a client modulo tested (modular) library contracts (VMTLC-Mod) if they satisfy the two conditions in the above definition 4.

4 Contextual Contracts 

We study a new notion of contracts that emerges in the setting of verification modulo tested library contracts, which we call contextual contracts . Contextual contracts are essentially contracts for library methods that are stated at each call-site in the client where library methods are called , with potentially different contracts at each call site. The meaning of such contracts is that the summaries     

> 4Observe that the definition of the VMTLC-Mod synthesis problem is similar to SyGuS problems which utilize a syntactically defined space of hypotheses, along with logical constraints involving the functions to be synthesized. In our case we want to synthesize definitions for the Iand Awhere the hypothesis space for each is the set of FOL formulas over the appropriate variables, and our constraints are twofold, involving a verifier and a tester. 8Verification Modulo Tested Library Contracts

they denote hold when methods are called by the given client at the respective call sites. Note that these are not modular contracts in the classical sense in that they need not hold in arbitrary contexts. More precisely, at each call site of the client, when the client makes a call to the library, it implicitly ensures a more restrictive precondition on the states of the library as well as the parameters passed to the method when the call is made, and the contextual contract captures more precise summaries for such calls. We recall the illustrated example from Section 2. When a client inserts only nonnegative integers into a container class, and later retrieves them and computes their sum, the client can assert that this sum is always nonnegative. Proving this using classical contracts is certainly possible, but the contracts will be more complex. If there is an observer method such as min , as discussed in Section 2, then there are valid modular contracts coupled with stronger client invariants that can prove correctness of the client. However, when observer methods such as min are missing, modular contracts can get much more complex to state. In this example, we could define a logical predicate min , but such a definition on a linked pointer-based container class would have to involve recursive definitions and more complex logics such as separation logic, which make both verification (of the client) and testing extremely hard, A contextual contract, on the other hand, is delightfully simple—it simply says that in the context of the client, removal of any member from the set will be nonnegative, and helps us show that the sum computed is nonnegative. This contract for remove is not true for all clients, of course. Note that modular contracts are contextual contracts as well, as contracts that hold in all contexts hold for the client’s contexts. However, contextual contracts need not be modular, as the above example shows. 

Why are Contextual Contracts Simpler? 

We now discuss precisely why contextual contracts are simpler than classical contracts. Let 𝐶 be a client that using a library 𝐿 , where 𝐿 

exposes classes. Note that there is a global heap 𝐻 of objects of the library that is modified by the library methods when they are called, and persist between calls. The client 𝐶 has references to instances but does not modify the heap directly. Assume we want to prove a safety property of the client 𝐶 .The standard approach in formal verification is to establish: 

• An inductive invariant 𝐼𝑛𝑣 𝐶 for the client that avoids the unsafe states of 𝐶 . This invariant is expressed in terms of the variables of the client as well as properties of the object heap 𝐻 

maintained by the library that can be gleaned using observer methods. 

• A precondition 𝑃𝑟𝑒 for when 𝐶 makes calls to 𝐿 . This is a predicate on both the parameters passed to 𝐿 as well as the state of the object heap 𝐻 at the time of the call expressed using observer methods. 

• A return condition 𝑅𝑒𝑡 that constrains the values returned by calls to methods of 𝐿 

• 𝑆𝑢𝑚𝑚 that captures the transformation of the object heap 𝐻 across method calls, expressed again using observer methods on the pre and post object heaps. 

• An inductive invariant 𝐼𝑛𝑣 𝐿 that is used to prove that 𝐿 does ensure 𝑅𝑒𝑡 and 𝑆𝑢𝑚𝑚 hold. This invariant can complex, involving the internal structure of the object heap, and may use aspects unobservable to the client. 

> 9Abhishek Uppar, Omar Muhammad, Sumanth Prabhu S, Deepak D’Souza, P. Madhusudan, and Adithya Murali

In formal verification, we would prove (1) 𝐶 maintains the invariant 𝐼𝑛𝑣 𝐶 and guarantees 𝑃𝑟𝑒 

at calls to 𝐿 , assuming 𝑅𝑒𝑡 and 𝑆𝑢𝑚𝑚 hold, and (2) the library 𝐿 , assuming 𝑃𝑟𝑒 , maintains the inductive invariant 𝐼𝑛𝑣 𝐿 , ensures return condition 𝑅𝑒𝑡 , and ensures the summary 𝑆𝑢𝑚𝑚 .In verification modulo tested modular library contracts, we dispense with 𝐼𝑛𝑣 𝐿 , as we are not proving the library correct. We instead prove (1) above and test that 𝐿 , assuming 𝑃𝑟𝑒 , satisfies 𝑅𝑒𝑡 

and summary 𝑆𝑢𝑚𝑚 . Note that we need the annotations 𝐼𝑛𝑣 𝐶 , 𝑃𝑟𝑒 , 𝑅𝑒𝑡 and 𝑆𝑢𝑚𝑚 .In verification modulo contextual contracts, we dispense with both 𝐼𝑛𝑣 𝐿 and 𝑃𝑟𝑒 ! We prove that 

𝐶 maintains its invariant 𝐼𝑛𝑣 𝐶 assuming 𝑅𝑒𝑡 and 𝑆𝑢𝑚𝑚 hold. And test that 𝐿 ’s contract in terms of 

𝑅𝑒𝑡 and 𝑆𝑢𝑚𝑚 hold when tested in the context of the client 𝐶 (it need not hold when it is called from arbitrary object heaps or arbitrary parameters). Note that we do not formalize 𝑃𝑟𝑒 , as the precondition is implicitly the set of all parameters and object heaps at which 𝐶 calls 𝐿 .The advantage of using contextual contracts in the verification modulo testing setting is that it can be much simpler than modular contracts, as we do not have to precisely delineate the precondition 𝑃𝑟𝑒 , and hence easier to synthesize. In fact, since 𝐶 is not proved to ensure 𝑃𝑟𝑒 

formally, the verification task for the client is simpler, In particular, the return condition 𝑅𝑒𝑡 , the summary 𝑆𝑢𝑚𝑚 , and the inductive invariant 𝐼𝑛𝑣 𝐶 can potentially be simpler as well. 

Formal Problem of Verification Modulo Tested Libraries with Contextual Contracts 

We can now formally define the problem of verification modulo testing of libraries using contextual contracts: 

Definition 4.1 (Contextual Contract Synthesis for Verification Modulo Tested Libraries). Fix classes 

C, library L, a program 𝑃 with both client code (with main method 𝑀 ) and library code, verification condition 𝜑 (𝑣, I, A) , test generator 𝑇 , and resource bound RB . Fix also the client invariants I, and method contracts A (containing a contract for each call-site in client code that makes a call to the library). We assume the VC 𝜑 for the client is also in terms of these contextual method names. Synthesize a set of formulas eI corresponding to the client invariants I over the appropriate vari-ables, as well as a set of formulas eA corresponding to the library contracts A over the appropriate variables, such that: (1) the VC substituted with the invariants and contracts 𝜑 (𝑣, eI, eA) is valid, and (2) the test generator 𝑇 (𝑃, contextual , 𝑀, eA; RB ) returns OK . □

Note that in condition (2) above the method under test is the client itself (with entry point as main method 𝑀 of client), i.e., we require that the library contracts hold when calls are reached via the main method of the client. There are no individual “unit” testing requirements for each library method (in contrast to verification modulo testing of modular library contracts; Definition 3.1). This is the sense in which the contracts are contextual : they are only required to hold on inputs and library states that can occur in a context of the client program’s calls to the library. Note that we are still limited to having one contract per call site (independent of the call stack). 

4.1 The Added Value of VMTLC with Contextual Contracts 

The argument as to why VMTLC with modular contracts adds value to just testing alone is that it must surely be hard to prove a wrong program correct by generating spurious contracts for libraries that pass independent testing and provide inductive invariants that prove the client correct modulo these contracts. Of course, there are programs where this can happen, as testing of contracts is incomplete. Contextual contracts help prove more correct programs correct (as described above) but they also can validate more incorrect programs. The reason is that there is no explicit precondition 

> 10 Verification Modulo Tested Library Contracts

stated under which the library is tested independently, and the only tests of libraries occur in the context of testing the entire program, with the client. For example, let’s assume that there is a rare event in the client that testing cannot reveal. An example code for a rare event is: 

int x:=0; while (*) { int v:= nondet[1,10]; x :=x+v } 

with the rare event being say x = 1729 after this code. This rare event would be hard to find by fuzz testing (or other forms of testing); for the sake of argument in this section, let us assume this is so. Now consider a client that manipulates a set— it first adds only positive numbers to the set, except that it adds a negative number to the set when the rare event happens. The client then removes the elements from the set, and asserts that each element is positive. This program is incorrect, and testing will not find an error. However, a spurious contextual contract that says that removing elements from the set will always result in positive elements will pass the tester that tests the client and the library together. And using this spurious contract, we can prove the client correct. Note that in this case, the spurious contract will not pass as a modular contract, as testing a modular contract allows the tester to add negative numbers, which will easily show the contract to be incorrect. A modular contract that has an explicit precondition saying elements added are positive will not work either as it would be impossible to prove that the client meets this precondition. Given the above, it is natural to wonder if VMTLC with contextual contracts adds any value to testing. We do believe that spurious contextual contracts may occur more often than spurious modular contracts, but posit that they do add value to just testing. Here is an example. Let foo be a function that has access to a static/global variable 𝑣 (initially 0). For an input integer 𝑥 , it returns 2 when 𝑥 = 𝑣 and increments 𝑣 by 3, and otherwise, returns 0.Consider the program: 

x:= 0; while (*) { y:=nondet(); z:= foo(y); x:= x + z; }; assert (x != 1220); 

The above program is incorrect, but it would be hard for testing to find an error. However, note that any contextual contract (or modular contract) for foo that allows the return value to be 2 cannot help prove the program correct. Furthermore, testing will easily reject any contract that doesn’t allow the return value to be 2, even when tested as the entire program (one of the nondeterministic values that foo is called with needs to be 0, in some test case). Consequently, VMTLC with contextual contracts (or modular contracts) will not prove this program correct. Also, note that if foo instead always returned values that are a multiple of 3, contextual (and modular) contracts exist that prove the program correct (with a loop invariant that 𝑥 is a multiple of 3). We hence believe that contextual contracts may also add value to testing, as it continues to be the case that finding spurious contracts that enable inductive invariants of the client to prove it correct will be hard to find in practice. 

5 A Solution to the VMTLC Problem 

In this section, we describe our solution to the VMTLC problem. We begin with an overview of our algorithm, followed by a discussion of our design choices for input verification conditions and the helper methods used in our algorithm, and finally present the algorithm. 

5.1 Overview 

Fig. 2 shows the schematic diagram of our general proposed technique. It takes as input a client program that calls library methods ( 𝐶 ), as well as verification conditions generated for the client with annotation and contract holes ( 𝐶𝐻𝐶 (𝐶 )). Additionally, the observer methods of the library are also passed as input ( 𝑂 ). These observer methods are used in the contracts of the library method.       

> 11 Abhishek Uppar, Omar Muhammad, Sumanth Prabhu S, Deepak D’Souza, P. Madhusudan, and Adithya Murali Tester
> Verified Sig Obs Meth Program
> VMTLC Verifier
> Client Lib Contracts Pos Exs
> Generalizing CHC Solver Constraint Solver
> Contracts Invs +
> ICE Learner
> +
> 𝐶 + CHC( 𝐶 )𝑂
> Pos Exs 𝑃
> +Client Invs CHC( 𝐶 )ICE Exs +Lib Contracts Library 𝐿
> Client Program 𝐶

Fig. 2. Schematic diagram of our proposed solution. 

Our technique then synthesizes contracts for the library methods and invariants for the client program in a counterexample guided loop. In each iteration of the loop, contracts and invariants are first synthesized by a generalizing CHC solver (details to follow in Section 5.3) such that the verification conditions are valid. This is followed by testing of contracts: either the library methods for modular contracts, or the client program for contextual contracts. If the testing fails, the test cases that cause the failure are passed as positive examples to the generalizing CHC solver. In the next iteration, the generalizing CHC solver learns contracts for methods (ensuring that the positive examples are included), along with invariants. This loop continues until the solver synthesizes contracts and invariants that verify the client, and where the contracts also pass the testing engine. 

5.2 Constrained Horn Clauses as Verification Conditions 

We assume a verification condition generator that works on the client program to produce verification conditions in the form of constrained Horn clauses (CHCs). Our technique is agnostic to the semantics of the programming language, the specification logics, frame reasoning, etc., as VC generation into CHC constraints takes these into account, and our framework takes CHCs as input. CHCs have become popular as a symbolic intermediate representations of correctness of programs, and verification conditions for CHCs have been developed for several programming languages and program reasoning methods have been developed for CHCs [ 13 , 14 , 19 –21 , 23 , 24 , 33 , 43 , 49 ]. A CHC is a first-order logic formula over a fixed set of uninterpreted relations, and a system of CHCs is a finite conjunctions of such formulas. A solution to a CHC system maps uninterpreted relations to predicates from a fixed logic. When a CHC system represents a program’s verification conditions, a solution to the system is a proof of the program’s correctness. Formally, for a fixed set of sorts S, a set of relation symbols R, and function symbols F , a CHC can be of one of the following forms: 

∀® 𝑥 0.  𝜓 ( ® 𝑥 0) =⇒ 𝑟 0 ( ® 𝑥 0) (fact) 

∀® 𝑥 0, . . . , ®𝑥 𝑘 +1.   Û 

> 0≤𝑖 ≤𝑘

𝑟 𝑖 ( ® 𝑥 𝑖 ) ∧ 𝜓 ( ® 𝑥 0, . . . , ®𝑥 𝑘 +1) =⇒ 𝑟 𝑘 +1 ( ® 𝑥 𝑘 +1) (inductive) 

∀® 𝑥 0, . . . , ®𝑥 𝑘 .   Û 

> 0≤𝑖 ≤𝑘

𝑟 𝑖 ( ® 𝑥 𝑖 ) ∧ 𝜓 ( ® 𝑥 0, . . . , ®𝑥 𝑘 ) =⇒ false  (query) where, for each 𝑖 , 𝑟 𝑖 is a relation in R of type 𝜂 1 ×𝜂 2 × · · · × 𝜂 𝑚 𝑟 𝑖 , where 𝑚 𝑟 𝑖 is the arity of 𝑟 𝑖 and each 

𝜂 𝑖 ∈ S . Further, ®𝑥 𝑖 represents the vector of variables (𝑥 1, . . . , 𝑥 𝑚 𝑟 𝑖 ), with each 𝑥 𝑖 of sort 𝜂 𝑖 . Also, 𝜓 ,called a constraint , is a formula in conjunctive normal form without uninterpreted relations. 

> 12 Verification Modulo Tested Library Contracts

init (S) ∧ 𝑖 = 0 =⇒ inv ′ 

> 1

(𝑖, 𝑁 , S) (𝜑 𝐶 1 )

inv 1 (𝑖, 𝑁 , S) ∧ 𝑖 < 𝑁 ∧ v1 ≥ 0 ∧ insert (S, v1 ) ∧ 𝑖 ′ = 𝑖 + 1 =⇒ inv ′ 

> 1

(𝑖 ′, 𝑁 , S) (𝜑 𝐶 2 )

inv 1 (𝑖, 𝑁 , S) ∧ ¬( 𝑖 < 𝑁 ) ∧ sum = 0 =⇒ inv 2 (𝑁 , S, sum ) (𝜑 𝐶 3 )

inv 2 (𝑁 , S, sum ) ∧ ¬ empty (S) ∧ remove (S, v2 ) ∧ sum ′ = sum + v2 =⇒ inv ′ 

> 2

(𝑁 , S, sum ′) (𝜑 𝐶 4 )

inv 2 (𝑁 , S, sum ) ∧ empty (S) ∧ sum < 0 =⇒ false (𝜑 𝐶 5 )

Fig. 3. CHCs for the client program from Fig. 1. 

For a given client program, S consists of primitive sorts (like boolean and integer) and desig-nated sorts of classes used in the program (like Set or BinarySearchTree ), R = {𝐼 1, 𝐼 2, . . . , 𝐼 𝑛 } ∪ {𝐴 1, 𝐴 2, . . . , 𝐴 𝑚 }, containing relations representing invariants and library method contracts, re-spectively, and F consists of operations and constants used in the program. The CHCs then encode the proof obligations of a Floyd-Hoare style proof, with constraints in them corresponding to program statements. In CHCs, the relations 𝐼 1, 𝐼 2, . . . , 𝐼 𝑛 will be over variables that are in scope, and the relations 𝐴 1, 𝐴 2, . . . , 𝐴 𝑚 will be over the called object, and arguments and return values of the corresponding methods they are representing. 

Example 5.1. Consider the CHCs in Fig. 3, corresponding to a Floyd-Hoare proof of the client program of Fig. 1(a). Here, R = {inv 1, inv 2 } ∪ { init , insert , empty , remove }, where inv 1 and inv 2 are the loop invariants 5, init represents the constructor, and insert , empty and remove represent the class methods insert , empty and remove , resp. Since variables of types int (variables 𝑁 , 𝑠𝑢𝑚, 𝑣 1, 𝑣 2), and Set (variable S) are used in the program, S = {Z, Set }. Further, the signature of init will be 

Set , as it initializes the object S, insert will be Set × Z, as it is called on the S object and takes an 

int variable as input. Similarly, the signature of empty will be Set , and remove will be Set × Z. The invariant relation inv 1 will have the signature Z × Z × Set , as the variables 𝑖, 𝑁 , S are in scope of the loop, while inv 2 will have the signature Z × Set × Z, corresponding the variables 𝑁 , S, 𝑠𝑢𝑚 .These relations are used in the CHCs 𝜑 𝐶 1 to 𝜑 𝐶 5 , where CHCs 𝜑 𝐶 1 to 𝜑 𝐶 4 are of type inductive and correspond to the initial and inductive conditions of the loops, while 𝜑 𝐶 5 is of type query. For a system of CHCs over R, a map of interpretations Sol assigns to each relation symbol 𝑟 ∈ R 

an interpretation 𝜃 (𝑥 1, . . . , 𝑥 𝑚 𝑟 ), where 𝜃 is a formula in a fixed logic. We use a quantifier-free fragment of a multi-sorted first-order logic of annotations (defined in Section 3). This logic will have a finite set of observer methods and their primed versions as uninterpreted functions of fixed sorts. For a CHC 𝜑 𝐶 and a map Sol , we can obtain a formula 𝜑 𝐶 (Sol ) by replacing all the relations 

𝑟 𝑖 (𝑦 1, . . . , 𝑦 𝑚 𝑟 𝑖 ) in 𝜑 𝐶 by Sol [𝑟 𝑖 ] ( 𝑦 1/𝑥 1, . . . , 𝑦 𝑚 𝑟 𝑖 /𝑥 𝑚 𝑟 𝑖 )6. If this formula is valid, then Sol is a solution 

to 𝜑 𝐶 and 𝜑 𝐶 is said to be satisfiable . Sol is a solution to a system of CHCs if it is a solution to all the CHCs in the system. If it is not a solution to a CHC 𝜑 𝐶 , a counterexample to validity (a ground formula in the logic of Sol ) can be obtained. Such examples are classified as positive if 𝜑 𝐶 is of type fact, Horn implication if 𝜑 𝐶 is of type inductive, and negative if 𝜑 𝐶 is of type query. 

5.3 Need for Generalizing CHC Solvers 

Recall that in our setting the input 𝜑 is a system of CHCs over R = {𝐼 1, 𝐼 2, . . . , 𝐼 𝑛 } ∪ { 𝐴 1, 𝐴 2, . . . , 𝐴 𝑚 },which are relations representing the client program’s invariants and library method contracts,             

> 5inv ′
> 1and inv ′
> 2are the same relations with slightly different interpretations; details to follow soon.
> 6For primed relations like inv ′, the interpretation Sol [inv ]is used, except that uninterpreted functions corresponding to observer methods in Sol [inv ]are replaced by their primed versions. 13 Abhishek Uppar, Omar Muhammad, Sumanth Prabhu S, Deepak D’Souza, P. Madhusudan, and Adithya Murali

respectively. The positive examples returned by the tester in each round in our framework can also be encoded as CHC constraints (these constraints will be fact constraints where the relation on the right side of the implication is a contract relation 𝐴 𝑖 ). Our technique calls for a generalizing CHC solver to synthesize a solution to 𝜑 , as opposed to an arbitrary CHC solver. Note that the contracts 𝐴 𝑖 are only constrained from below by the positive counterexamples returned by the tester. An arbitrary CHC solver could choose to solve the CHC by overfitting this set of positive examples (say by insisting that the 𝐴 𝑖 ’s cover precisely the positive counterexamples). This would cause repeated calls to the tester and cause divergence, where we never find the right contracts. Hence we require that the CHC solver generalizes the library method contracts 𝐴 1, . . . , 𝐴 𝑚 . One common way to generalize is to bias the search towards small logical expressions for each 𝐴 𝑖 in the annotation logic, which automatically forces generalization. 

5.4 ICE Learners as Generalizing CHC Solvers 

We use the data-driven learning framework called Implication Counterexample (ICE) learning [ 10 ,12 , 16 , 17 ] as the basis of a generalizing CHC solver. Learners in this framework find a general solution by learning from positive, Horn implication, and negative examples, which are counterex-amples to the satisfaction of CHCs. At a high level, ICE learners operate in an incremental loop. In each iteration, a candidate solution is learned using examples from previous iterations. This candidate solution is then checked to see whether it satisfies all the CHCs. If not, counterexamples to satisfaction are collected and used in subsequent iterations to refine the candidate solution. 

Algorithm 1: ICE-CHCSolver (𝜑 , PosCex )

Input: 𝜑 – system of CHCs for a client program over relations R = I ∪ A , where I and A

represent program invariants and library method contracts respectively; PosCex – set of positive examples for relations in A

Output: Sol (map from R to predicates) which is a solution to 𝜑  

> 1

E ← PosCex , Sol 𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑑 ← { 𝑟 ↦ → true | 𝑟 ∈ R} ; 

> 2

while exists 𝜑 𝐶 such that 𝜑 𝐶 (Sol 𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑑 ) is not valid do  

> 3

E ← E ∪ GetCex (𝜑 𝐶 , Sol 𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑑 ); 

> 4

Sol 𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑑 ← ICELearner (E) ; 

> 5

return ⟨Sol 𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑑 , 𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑒 ⟩;Algorithm 1 provides a formal description of a generalizing CHC solver built on the ICE learner framework. It takes as input the CHCs 𝜑 and positive examples PosCex from the test generator. The algorithm first initializes the set of examples ( E) with the input set of positive examples (line 1). Subsequently, in each iteration of the loop, the algorithm checks whether there exists a CHC 𝜑 𝐶 for which the current candidate Sol 𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑑 is not a solution (line 2). If such a 𝜑 𝐶 is found, a counterexample is generated (line 3). Recall that the counterexample is a ground formula in the logic of the solution. It will be classified as a positive example if 𝜑 𝐶 is of type fact, a Horn implication example if 𝜑 𝐶 

is inductive, and a negative example if query. A new candidate solution is then learned that is not only consistent with the examples, but also generalizes the solution (line 4). This loop repeats till 

Sol 𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑑 becomes a solution to the system 𝜑 .We now present different realizations of the learning algorithm that synthesize generalized candidate solutions which are consistent with a given set of examples. 

> 14 Verification Modulo Tested Library Contracts

5.4.1 HornICE An ICE learner, HornICE [ 12 ] uses a decision tree learning algorithm to synthesize solutions, extending standard decision tree algorithms for positive/negative samples to work on ICE samples. A candidate solution is synthesized by learning a decision tree for each relation, and works in polynomial time. The decision tree is guaranteed to be consistent with the ICE samples. The decision trees constructed in this way have base formulas from a fixed template (e.g. octagonal constraints over variables). As a result, decision trees correspond to boolean combinations of these base formulas. Also, the construction favors small decision trees by using heuristics such as entropy, which often leads to generalized formulas. 

5.4.2 Large Language Models (LLMs) Transformer-based neural networks realizing Large Language Model (LLM) have recently been found to be useful in program verification tasks, such as invariant and precondition synthesis [ 9, 26 , 27 , 47 ]. Furthermore, they have been trained on coding tasks [ 1 ,46 ], many of which use data-structure libraries. Motivated by these, we use an LLM as an ICE learner. Our algorithm interacts with the LLM through textual prompts (the prompt templates can be found in Appendix C). The initial prompt includes the input client program ( 𝐶 ), its CHC encoding (𝜑 𝐶 ), and a textual description of the task (see C.1). The algorithm expects the LLM to return a candidate solution to the formula variables in 𝜑 , which includes invariants and library method contracts. If the candidate is not a solution or subsequent testing fails, a repair prompt is generated, which includes the examples, and sent to the LLM, expecting it to repair the solution (prompt templates in C.3 and C.4). 

5.4.3 Combination of HornICE and Large Language Models In this approach, initially the LLM is queried to get atomic formulas (prompt template in C.5). These are passed to the HornICE learner as a template. Subsequently, HornICE is used as the ICE learner. It now considers the normalized atomic formulas as node attributes, in place of the fixed templates used previously, and learns decision trees. 

5.5 Test Generator 

In our algorithm, the test generator takes as input library contracts present in the solution synthe-sized by the learner and tests them against the library implementation. This step is necessary as a solution of the CHC system can overly restrict the contracts of library methods. Our algorithm expects the test generator to check such solutions by generating test cases and returning the failing test cases as positive examples. In turn, the learner generalizes the contracts by using these positive examples. For example, consider the solution to the CHCs in Fig. 3, which maps all the relations to false (which vacuously satisfies all the CHCs). In this case, the test generator should produce positive examples for library methods which violate the specification false as a method contract. A formal description of the test generator is presented in Algorithm 2. The algorithm takes as input the client program 𝐶 , the library 𝐿 , the mode of verification (modular/contextual), the library method 𝑁 to test (for use in modular mode), contracts for the library methods, and a testing resource bound. The call to ConstructProgram constructs a program ( TestProgram ) which will read its inputs from an input buffer Buf and test the appropriate method contracts. In the modular mode, TestProgram creates library objects necessary to invoke the method 𝑁 , sets up the state of the these objects by calling library methods on them (the operations to call and the arguments to pass are determined by the input buffer Buf ). It then invokes method 𝑁 on the appropriate object (once again with arguments determined by Buf ). Before and after this invocation, it records the values of the observer methods on the pre/post state of the object, along with the arguments and return value of 𝑁 , in val . Finally, it asserts the contract for 𝑁 (i.e. Sol (𝑁 )) with the values from val 

plugged in. If the assertion fails it returns TestOk = false , along with the method name 𝑁 and val . If 

> 15 Abhishek Uppar, Omar Muhammad, Sumanth Prabhu S, Deepak D’Souza, P. Madhusudan, and Adithya Murali

Algorithm 2: TestGenerator (𝐶 , 𝐿 , mode , 𝑁 , Sol , RB )

Input: Client program 𝐶 , library 𝐿 , method under test 𝑁 , contracts Sol for methods in 𝐿 ,resource bound on testing RB 

Output: Result of testing TestOk , set of positive examples 𝑃  

> 1

TestProgram ← ConstructProgram (𝐶, 𝐿, mode , 𝑁 , Sol ); 

> 2

while RB is not exhausted do  

> 3

Buf ← InitBuf() ; 

> 4

⟨TestOk , 𝑁 ′, val ⟩ ← Execute (TestProgram , Buf ); 

> 5

if ¬TestOk then return ⟨false , {( 𝑁 ′, val )}⟩ ; 

> 6

return ⟨true , ∅⟩ ;the assertion passes it returns true . If the mode is contextual, TestProgram is essentially the client program 𝐶 with instrumentation for each contextual method call, similar to the modular mode. Then, in a loop, the test generator algorithm initializes Buf (line 3), and executes TestProgram on it. If TestProgram returns an assertion failure, the corresponding method name 𝑁 ′ and valuation 

val are returned. The loop continues until RB is exhausted. If no assertion violation is found in the loop, the algorithm returns success (line 6). 

5.6 Complete Algorithm 

Algorithm 3: VMTLC (𝐶 , 𝐿 , mode , 𝜑 , RB )

Input: Client program 𝐶 , library 𝐿 , Mode mode (modular /contextual ), CHCs 𝜑 for 𝐶 over relations R = I ∪ A , test resources RB 

Output: Solution Sol to 𝜑 , in the form of a map from R to predicates  

> 1

PosCex ← ∅ , TestOk ← false , CHCOk ← false ; 

> 2

while ¬( CHCOk ∧ TestOk ) do  

> 3

⟨Sol , CHCOk ⟩ ← ICE-CHCSolver (𝜑, PosCex ); 

> 4

if mode = contextual then  

> 5

⟨TestOk , 𝑃 ⟩ ← TestGenerator (𝐶, 𝐿, contextual , −, Sol , RB ); 

> 6

if ¬TestOk then PosCex ← PosCex ∪ 𝑃 ; 

> 7

else // modular mode, test each library method 𝑁 in Ł 

> 8

TestOk ← true ; 

> 9

foreach method 𝑁 in 𝐿 do  

> 10

⟨TestOk ′, 𝑃 ⟩ ← TestGenerator (𝐶, 𝐿, modular , 𝑁 , Sol , RB ); 

> 11

if ¬TestOk ′ then PosCex ← PosCex ∪ 𝑃 ; 

> 12

TestOk ← TestOk ∧ TestOk ′ ; 

> 13

end  

> 14

return Sol ;Algorithm 3 gives a formal description of our approach to find contracts in the verification modulo testing setting. It takes as input a client program 𝐶 , along with the library 𝐿 , a string mode 

representing the verification mode (contextual/modular), corresponding CHCs of the program ( 𝜑 ), and resource constraints on the test generator ( RB ). The algorithm operates in a counterexample guided synthesis loop until it finds a solution to 𝜑 (variable CHCOk is true ) that also passes 

> 16 Verification Modulo Tested Library Contracts

testing (variable TestOk is true ). In the first iteration of the loop, a generalizing CHC solver (helper method ICE-CHCSolver ) synthesizes a map of interpretations ( Sol , line 3) that is a solution to the CHCs 𝜑 . This is followed by testing, where the library contracts in Sol are tested. If the mode is contextual, the contracts are tested through the client program 𝐶 (line 5). If the mode is modular, the contracts for each library method 𝑁 are checked separately (line 10) via a test harness. Whenever testing fails the corresponding valuations ( 𝑃 ) are added to the set of positive examples PosCex 

(lines 6 and 11). In the subsequent iterations, ICE-CHCSolver will make sure that the solution it synthesizes to 𝜑 also generalizes positive examples in PosCex . Algorithm 3 always terminates with a solution if the following conditions are satisfied: 1) the logic of the CHC solutions is finite, 2) a general solution exists within the logic, and 3) ICE-CHCSolver correctly classifies examples. 

6 Implementation 

We implement our framework (Algorithm 3) in a tool named Dualis , in Python. Dualis orchestrates the communication between the learning algorithms and the constraint solvers in the framework. In particular, our implementation offers the following ICE learners: (1) HornICE [12 ], a decision tree learner, (2) an LLM-based ICE learner built using Gemini v2.5 Pro and appropriate prompts, (c) and a combined HornICE+LLM learner that uses the decision tree learner for synthesizing client invariants and library contracts using atomic formulas generated by Gemini v2.5 Pro. We use Z3 [ 11 ] to check verification conditions for the client. The test generator is implemented using the AFL++ 7 fuzzing framework. The HornICE learner synthesizes expressions in a grammar that is a boolean combination of octogonal constraints over integer variables and booleans. The variables are input parameters and values of observer functions. In the case of the combined learner, the LLM is asked for base expressions which are incorporated into the grammar. To use AFL++ for testing, we create a test harness that (a) creates objects and manipulates them using methods from the class as dictated by an input controlled by AFL++, and (b) calls the method under test instrumented with the candidate contracts as runtime assertions. When a contract violation is encountered, we get a counterexample. Note that the testing setup is different for modular and contextual contracts; modular contracts are tested directly with the library methods as the methods under test, and contextual contracts are tested via the client. We provide different prompts to the LLM for synthesizing modular and contextual contracts (see Appendix C). The prompt contains (a) the client code, (b) signatures of library methods, (c) the CHCs corresponding to the VC, (d) ICE counterexamples from the verifier and positive counterexamples from the test engine, and (e) instructions for the LLM for the contract and invariant synthesis problems, including the expected output format. 

7 Evaluation 

In this section we describe our benchmark suite and the research questions we study. 

Benchmarks 

Our benchmark suite consists of 43 C++ client programs that utilize various popular open-source data structure libraries. These client programs are primarily adapted from unit tests into more challenging clients for verification. We derive 19 benchmarks from Folly 8 (libraries used in Face-book), 9 from Abseil 9 (libraries used in Google), and 1 from the Android source-code 10 . Additionally, 

> 7https://github.com/AFLplusplus/AFLplusplus
> 8https://github.com/facebook/folly
> 9https://github.com/abseil/abseil-cpp/
> 10 https://cs.android.com/android/kernel/superproject 17 Abhishek Uppar, Omar Muhammad, Sumanth Prabhu S, Deepak D’Souza, P. Madhusudan, and Adithya Murali

we incorporated 14 benchmarks from SV-COMP Java category [ 7 ], which already had client and library implementations. We rewrite these benchmarks into C++. Overall, these benchmarks include libraries with lines of code ranging from 100 to 3000, client programs with 2-6 library methods. 6 of our benchmarks are ∼3000 LoC. A detailed description of the suite can be found in Table 2 in Appendix A. Our benchmark suite is beyond the scope of the state-of-the-art in full automated verification. More precisely, we tried to verify our benchmarks using SeaHorn [ 20 ], and all but 7 of them failed to verify or returned spurious counterexamples. The 7 benchmarks contained libraries on the smaller side in our suite (< 200 LoC). In fact, even when given contracts for the library methods that would prove the client correct, SeaHorn failed to verify. Our suite contains benchmarks that are challenging both in size and in the complexity of the verification problem. For example, the FlatHashMap4 benchmark, has a client with ∼30 LoC and a library with ∼3000 LoC. The library is adapted from similar classes found in both the Abseil and Folly repositories, and the client is adapted from a test harness that captures a common usage pattern of the data structure. The ProcessQueue benchmark is another interesting example, adapted from SV-COMP and derived from a real-world scheduling application. The client ( ∼20 LoC) utilizes a library ( ∼100 LoC) that implements a waiting process queue, tracking time-to-wake for processes, returning those that are due. SeaHorn was not able to verify either of these benchmarks automatically given more than an hour. 

Research Questions 

We study the following research questions: 

RQ1: How effective are the proposed techniques at verifying clients modulo tested library contracts, both modular and contextual contracts? 

To answer this question we evaluate our proposed techniques on our benchmarks suite. We present the detailed results of our evaluation in Table 1. We report the results grouped by the choice of ICE learner: HornICE , LLM , or HornICE+LLM . We consider a benchmark to be solved by a technique if it is able to generate contracts for libraries that pass the test generator, and the client is verified to be correct using these contracts. We run the pure LLM-based pipeline thrice to account for nondeterministic behavior of LLMs. We gave a timeout of 1000 seconds for the ICE learners to synthesize a solution and AFL++ was provided with a timeout of 500 seconds, for each round they are called. We ran our tool on an Intel(R) Xeon(R) W-2295 CPU @ 3.00 GHz with 256 GB RAM, running Ubuntu 20.04. For modular contracts, out of 43 benchmarks, HornICE solved 19 benchmarks, HornICE+LLM 

solved 25, and the LLM solution solved 38. For contextual contracts, HornICE solved 21, Hor-nICE+LLM solved 28, and LLM solved 41 benchmarks. We find our framework fairly effective in solving VMTLC, given that the benchmarks cannot be verified by state-of-the-art automated tools. Upon further analysis we observed that the failures of HornICE and HornICE+LLM could be explained significantly by the absence of required predicates in their templates. For example, in the benchmark TokenBucket a library method contract required an expression over three variables. The pure LLM learner was able to synthesize the expression, but the expression was not covered by the grammar for the HornICE learner (octagonal constraints over two variables), and it was not part of the initial set of predicates given by the LLM for the HornICE+LLM learner. We leave the improvement of the latter two learners to address these failure modes to future work. One failure mode we observed for VMTLC is the lack of sufficiently expressive observer methods. For example, in the AtomicLinkedList2 benchmark, the client inserts keys into a linked list and pops them in LIFO order. The assertion asks to show that the last element popped is the first one 

> 18

Verification Modulo Tested Library Contracts 

Benchmark 

HornICE HornICE+LLM LLM 

Modular Contextual Modular Contextual Modular Contextual E+I T(m) E+I T(m) E+I T(m) E+I T(m) E+I T(m) E+I T(m) AlternatingList 8+311 12.00 5+154 3.86 6+95 2.67 1+70 2.27 2+3 3.12 1+1 0.92 AtomicHashMap1 2+3 TO 4+9 TO 5+199 TO 4+5 TO 5+7 10.68 2+4 11.38 AtomicHashMap2 3+31 TO 5+212 TO 4+87 TO 6+117 TO 4+5 8.95 2+3 6.28 AtomicHashMap3 2+16 TO 2+15 TO 2+7 TO 2+8 TO 8+10 20.77 1+1 1.83 AtomicHashMap4 5+140 TO 3+16 1.35 5+65 TO 3+50 1.29 6+7 10.72 2+2 4.33 AtomicHashMap5 4+58 TO 5+51 3.36 6+98 TO 17+124 TO 2+2 8.92 2+2 4.25 AtomicLinkedList1 5+225 TO 4+134 2.49 4+125 TO 4+38 2.17 2+3 2.38 1+2 1.55 AtomicLinkedList2 2+12 TO 2+12 TO 2+7 TO 3+183 TO 15+25 TO 15+21 TO BinaryHeap1 2+14 TO 2+14 TO 2+8 TO 2+8 TO 15+31 TO 7+9 16.97 BinaryHeap2 3+47 4.31 4+14 2.23 3+43 4.96 4+13 2.20 1+1 1.58 2+2 3.18 BinaryTree 5+88 6.90 4+48 2.21 3+7 6.72 3+28 1.30 2+1 3.12 3+5 2.25 BlueWhiteList 5+42 3.36 4+27 2.20 6+57 4.69 4+12 2.14 1+1 0.88 1+1 1.15 Calendar 5+199 5.58 6+139 4.96 5+32 3.60 1+20 3.23 1+1 1.3 1+1 1.80 DLL_Circular 9+144 10.26 6+74 4.63 9+52 6.67 6+25 4.33 1+1 0.96 1+1 1.07 DLL_Token 5+335 TO 3+157 5.08 2+18 14.90 6+150 5.70 1+1 1.37 3+3 2.60 FlatHashMap1 7+182 13.52 5+131 3.49 10+58 TO 4+28 2.18 4+4 6.22 1+1 1.07 FlatHashMap2 11+273 TO 2+6 3.43 9+54 16.33 5+61 3.28 9+11 16.37 1+1 0.83 FlatHashMap3 8+290 TO 4+144 3.67 5+142 TO 4+35 2.24 15+19 TO 1+2 2.93 FlatHashMap4 3+59 TO 3+55 4.3 6+93 TO 3+53 TO 15+22 TO 2+3 5.72 FlatHashSet 2+5 TO 5+23 TO 2+5 TO 5+14 TO 13+20 43.75 3+5 4.91 LruCache1 2+3 TO 3+6 TO 4+288 12.8 3+4 TO 15+18 TO 15+20 TO List (Max) 5+75 3.43 5+62 3.24 11+275 3.09 5+43 4.43 2+3 1.08 1+1 0.73 List (Min) 5+76 3.38 2+20 0.68 11+738 5.35 2+19 0.69 1+1 0.63 1+1 0.63 Multimap1 5+283 TO 14+40 2.79 5+33 4.13 3+33 1.32 2+2 1.45 1+1 0.70 Multimap2 3+19 TO 3+6 TO 12+75 TO 3+4 TO 1+1 0.85 1+1 0.85 Multiset1 3+36 TO 2+8 TO 4+196 5.14 4+128 3.63 1+1 0.72 1+1 0.7 Multiset2 3+12 TO 3+6 TO 15+138 TO 4+22 TO 1+1 0.85 1+1 1.05 NormalFilterQueue 3+67 2.39 4+131 2.64 3+23 2.30 4+26 2.17 2+2 2.01 1+1 1.32 PriorityFilterQueue 3+67 2.48 3+95 1.59 4+45 4.46 7+61 2.21 2+2 2.45 1+1 2.24 ProcessQueue 3+24 TO 5+211 3.00 4+127 4.88 5+95 2.62 13+23 40.97 1,2 1.87 RedBlackTree 2+3 TO 4+20 1.56 11+57 TO 4+18 1.55 2+2 5.70 1+1 1.83 SkipList1 2+3 TO 4+228 9.68 2+18 TO 5+244 3.22 2+3 7.07 3+3 4.38 SkipList2 3+17 2.71 4+16 2.17 3+4 2.76 4+8 2.13 2+3 4.02 3+4 4.82 SkipList3 3+11 2.72 4+14 2.13 3+11 2.71 4+8 2.13 2+2 4.23 2+2 3.50 SkipList4 2+15 TO 3+84 TO 2+7 TO 2+7 TO 2+4 6.87 1+3 3.54 SkipList5 3+21 2.74 4+34 2.17 3+20 2.30 4+16 2.16 3+3 6.72 2+2 3.77 SkipList6 3+32 TO 4+198 7.20 3+5 TO 4+60 2.23 3+5 8.23 2+4 4.50 SkipList7 4+52 4.70 4+26 2.15 3+19 3.40 4+13 2.13 2+5 3.67 3+5 7.62 Stack 6+330 11.61 6+254 5.34 5+163 18.07 6+71 4.40 2+3 2.70 1+1 1.63 StockOrder 3+72 1.54 5+90 3.36 3+38 1.51 4+49 2.13 2+6 5.93 1+1 0.95 TokenBucket1 3+186 5.00 6+229 4.20 3+30 4.34 1+14 1.16 2+3 2.55 1+1 1.03 TokenBucket2 3+84 2.90 4+97 1.94 3+50 2.15 7+45 2.18 2+2 2.33 1+1 1.80 TokenBucket3 7+227 TO 4+126 TO 4+20 4.16 3+68 3.16 2+2 2.18 1+1 1.62 

Table 1. Results of Dualis using different learners. Columns represent: benchmark name (Benchmark), and for each learner’s contextual and modular approach: the sum of iterations (E+I) and execution time in minutes (Time). The ‘E’ value represents the total iterations between learner and test generator (i.e. external loop in Algorithm 3), and ‘I’ represents the total iterations the learner took (i.e. loop of Algorithm 1). For the LLM learner, we report the maximum iteration counts over two runs, or the counts from the single successful run if only one completed. Entries for benchmarks with TO in the ‘T(m)’ represent a time out, where the entry in ‘E+I’ column is the number of iterations completed before time out. 

that was inserted. This can of course be established easily using an observer method that tracks the last element in the list, but there was no such method provided by the library. Consequently, our tool found no modular or contextual contracts that verified the client. We leave the exploration of synthesizing observer methods to future work. 

19 Abhishek Uppar, Omar Muhammad, Sumanth Prabhu S, Deepak D’Souza, P. Madhusudan, and Adithya Murali 

A small mutant study: We study the performance of our framework in rejecting mutants of our benchmark programs that are incorrect but pass testing. We systematically create a class of complex incorrect mutants that evade testing (see Appendix A for details). We do this because our clients formulate rich functional specifications that depend on the libraries, which results in simple mutants generated by off-the-shelf mutation generators being found incorrect by the tester. We create 30 mutants by applying 2 intentionally unsafe mutation templates on 15 benchmarks that were previously VMTLC-verified using contextual or modular contract synthesis. These tem-plates modify the client by introducing a probabilistically rare execution path inside the program’s non-deterministic loop. When triggered, this rare path injects unexpected values (such as inserting a negative number when the client asserts that all elements are positive) altering the local or library state and eventually driving the program to an assertion violation. We observe that the tester is not able to find the bug in any of them. Using the pure LLM Learner, we observe that VMTLC with modular contracts does not prove any of them, i.e., rejects them as expected. VMTLC with contextual contracts verifies 11/30 benchmarks, synthesizing spurious contracts that were not caught by testing due to hard-to-reach paths. See discussion in Section 4.1 on why we expect contextual contracts to be more likely to be spurious than modular ones. The buggy programs obtained by our mutations are not very natural/realistic, and this study should not be taken as a comprehensive evaluation of VMTLC on incorrect programs. Our findings suggest, however, that VMTLC fails on many incorrect programs that testing is unable to find fault with (see Section 4.1). 

RQ2: Are contextual contracts simpler than modular contracts, and are they easier to synthesize? 

Synthesizing contextual contracts was indeed much more effective (i.e., more benchmarks solved) than synthesizing modular contracts to establish VMTLC. All techniques took less time to synthesize contextual contracts. A manual inspection revealed that the synthesized contextual contracts were consistently smaller and less complex than their modular counterparts across all benchmarks. 

RQ3: Are the synthesized library method contracts valid? 

Determining the accuracy of synthesized contracts automatically is a nontrivial problem. One can try to ascertain their correctness using a program verification engine, but our benchmarks cannot be proved using such engines (we tried using SeaHorn [ 20 ] and it failed, as mentioned earlier). It is in fact this hardness that motivated us to propose the VMTLC problem in the first place! We first manually vetted all contracts generated by all learners to establish a verified baseline. However, due to the inherent non-determinism of LLMs, subsequent runs might yield syntactically different contracts. To account for this variance, we executed the LLM pipeline two additional times. For these subsequent runs, we utilized a constraint solver to verify whether the newly synthesized contracts were logically implied by our manually vetted baseline. Contracts satisfying this implication were automatically deemed correct, while any that did not were vetted manually. Our examination found that all synthesized contextual and modular contracts using all learners are correct. The level of guarantee that VMTLC contracts provide is influenced by the quality of the test generator. We therefore investigate the robustness of our results in two ways. First, we check all the final specifications generated by our tool (across learner variations) against the test generator (AFL++) for an additional 30 minutes after each run. We found no violations of any synthesized specifications. Second, we report on the quality of tests using standard fuzzing metrics tracked by AFL++. On average, each of the final contracts were tested against 34 test cases (after AFL++’s removal of cases it deems redundant). The average bitmap coverage, defined as the percentage of edges exercised in the test object, was 50%, indicating substantial exploration of program behaviors. 

> 20 Verification Modulo Tested Library Contracts

Finally, the stability metric was 100%, meaning that executions were fully deterministic and the generated tests were reproducible across runs. 

RQ4: How important is it to use a generalizing CHC solver to solve VMTLC? 

As argued in the introduction, our VMTCL framework is best served by a generalizing CHC engine, and the learners we implement are generalizing. To evaluate how a non-generalizing CHC solver would fare, we replaced the CHC solver in our tool with CVC5 [ 6 ]. With CVC5 as the solver, the tool produced only 10 modular contracts and 15 contextual contracts on our benchmarks, showing a significant reduction in succeeding at VMTLC compared to learning-based CHC solvers. 

8 Related Work 

Data-driven inference of library preconditions and invariants. Several works consider the problem of synthesizing testable preconditions for library methods w.r.t. a postcondition [ 4 , 5, 18 , 39 , 44 ]. In particular [ 4 , 5 ] synthesize weakest preconditions (w.r.t. not causing exceptions) and a strongest post-condition corresponding to this precondition, in a similar setting to ours, where the conditions are phrased in terms of observer methods of the library. However, these techniques are not directly applicable in our setting as the client program may typically need a stronger precondition and a stronger postcondition to prove its assertions. [ 35 ] infers data-structure invariants that are sufficient to prove a given specification for a library module. The candidate invariants are tested for inductiveness and sufficiency w.r.t. the specification. In contrast, we only have access to the data structure via the observer methods, and we have a client that needs to be formally proved. 

Data-driven inference of library specifications. Zhou et al. [48] look at a closely related problem, where they synthesize contracts for library methods used by a client functional program, using observer methods (or what they call “method predicates”), that are adequate to both prove a property of the client and pass a tester. The main technique they use is an adaptation of multi-abduction [ 2] to a setting of richer types. However, there are a couple of crucial differences between their setting and ours. Firstly, they do not infer inductive invariants for recursive client programs: the user is required to supply these along with the property assertion. As a consequence, in the resulting VCs the only unknown predicates to be synthesized are the library method contracts, making the problem amenable to abduction-based techniques. In contrast, in our setting we need to synthesize loop invariants in addition to the library method contracts. In our experience, abduction-based techniques in this setting (for example [ 42 ]) don’t perform well on this problem. Not having to synthesize loop invariants also means that data-driven approaches in the functional setting can get by with just positive and negative examples, while in our setting we need to handle Horn-implication examples. Finally, in contrast to the functional setting, reasoning about heap-manipulating programs and libraries with persistent state is harder and requires more sophisticated program logics. 

Satisfiability/Synthesis modulo oracles. The tester in our setting can be viewed as an oracle that is part of the synthesis specification. Such oracle-based synthesis has been considered in other work (e.g. [ 41 ]). However it is not clear if these techniques generalize the examples given by the oracle. [ 38 , 41 ] consider the related problem where given a constraint with unknown black-box functions (whose implementation alone is available) one tries to find a satisfying assignment to free variables in the formula that is consistent with the behaviour of the black-box functions. While our problem does not exactly fit in this setting, these techniques could be used to tackle the complementary problem of falsifying the assertions in the client program in a way that is consistent with the library method implementations. Extending this line of work [ 37 ] tries to prove F* programs correct modulo contracts for library methods which are tested for consistency with the library implementation, while [ 30 ] learns almost-correct invariants for loops containing opaque 

> 21 Abhishek Uppar, Omar Muhammad, Sumanth Prabhu S, Deepak D’Souza, P. Madhusudan, and Adithya Murali

calls to library functions. In contrast to our setting, the contracts are not about stateful methods, and are either supplied by the user or not synthesized at all. 

Using LLMs for synthesizing invariants. Several researchers have explored the use of LLMs for reasoning about program verification tasks like precondition and loop invariant synthesis [ 9, 25 –27 , 36 , 40 , 47 ], demonstrating their usefulness in coming up with candidate specifications, and their performance being comparable to state-of-the-art symbolic techniques when combined with traditional techniques like static analysis, solvers, and fuzzing. Our work explores their use in synthesizing library specifications and in constructing an effective generalizing CHC Solver. 

Assume-Guarantee Testing. VMTLC has similarities to assume-guarantee testing [ 8 ], which proposes decomposing global specifications to modular specifications, in order to have more effective unit testing and predictive testing. However, our work aims for synthesizing modular specifications and have some components (the client) verified while others are only tested. 

9 Conclusions 

We have presented a significant advance in the problem of verification of clients using synthesized contracts for libraries, where libraries are only tested for validity. In particular, in this work we have developed a general and novel framework that utilizes generalizing CHC solvers , and techniques for realizing such solvers using ICE-learning algorithms. We have proposed and evaluated our framework using several ICE learning algorithms ranging from those that learn decision-trees, those that use LLMs, and their combinations Our evaluation shows that our technique shows promise in effectively solving verification modulo tested library contracts, in settings where clients are small and libraries are large, and where current automated techniques fail. Verification modulo testing library contracts presents a new point in the design space for automated verification—to get scalability to larger code bases we give up verification guarantees for parts of the code. A natural question that arises is: how valuable is this partial verification given that contracts for libraries are tested, but not verified ? First, if synthesized contracts for libraries happen to be valid, there is clear value in the approach, as we have formally verified the client. Consequently, it is very important to have effective testing engines to test contracts. As borne out in our evaluation, an effective testing strategy practically eliminates invalid contracts, though not provably so. We believe that the chances that the synthesizer comes up with invalid contracts that pass the tester as well as simultaneously happen to prove a nontrivial client program correct would be rare. However, much larger scale experiments are needed to validate this hypothesis in practical contexts. We believe our results show that VMTLC has the potential to make automated verification significantly more applicable to larger programs than the current state of the art. There are several future directions to consider. First, it would be interesting to evaluate what the guarantee of verification modulo tested libraries brings over simply testing a program, in practice. An evaluation on a large corpus of programs, in a particular context, as to how many correct programs are VMTLC verifiable, and also how many wrong programs are rejected by the VMTLC framework but not by testing, would be interesting. On the technical front, we have primarily explored verification of clients for simple assertions. It would be interesting to extend our framework to more complex logics, such as clients that manipulate their own heaps (in addition to heaps maintained by libraries), and handle specification logics for clients that involve heaps. The verification conditions may not lie in decidable logics unlike the setting of this paper, and the ability to generate counterexamples may be more limited. Finally, contextual contracts that stem from our work seem interesting even under non-automated settings, where verification engineers prove clients using human written annotations, but with contextual contracts only tested. This is an appealing idea that is worth exploring further. 

> 22 Verification Modulo Tested Library Contracts

Acknowledgments: This work was supported in part by a research grant from Amazon. 

> 23

Abhishek Uppar, Omar Muhammad, Sumanth Prabhu S, Deepak D’Souza, P. Madhusudan, and Adithya Murali 

Data-Availability Statement 

The artifact supporting this paper, which includes the implementation of our tool Dualis , the complete suite of benchmarks, and the evaluation scripts required to reproduce the experimental results presented in Section 7, is publicly available. To ensure long-term archival, and reproducing the results of this article, the artifact has been packaged and published on Zenodo at https://doi. org/10.5281/zenodo.19519743. For building upon the framework, the public repository is hosted on GitHub at https://github.com/omar826/Dualis-VMTLC. 

References 

[1] Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al . 2023. GPT-4 Technical Report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 

(2023). [2] Aws Albarghouthi, Isil Dillig, and Arie Gurfinkel. 2016. Maximal specification synthesis. In Proc. 43rd Annual ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symp. Principles of Programming Languages (POPL 2016), St. Petersburg, USA, January 20-22, 2016 .ACM, 789–801. [3] Krzysztof R. Apt and Ernst-Rüdiger Olderog. 2019. Fifty years of Hoare’s logic, Chapter 9. Form. Asp. Comput. 31, 6 (2019). [4] Angello Astorga, P. Madhusudan, Shambwaditya Saha, Shiyu Wang, and Tao Xie. 2019. Learning stateful preconditions modulo a test generator (PLDI 2019) . ACM, New York, NY, USA, 775–787. [5] Angello Astorga, Shambwaditya Saha, Ahmad Dinkins, Felicia Wang, P. Madhusudan, and Tao Xie. 2021. Synthesizing contracts correct modulo a test generator. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 5, OOPSLA, Article 104 (Oct. 2021), 27 pages. [6] Haniel Barbosa, Clark W. Barrett, Martin Brain, Gereon Kremer, Hanna Lachnitt, Makai Mann, Abdalrhman Mohamed, Mudathir Mohamed, Aina Niemetz, Andres Nötzli, Alex Ozdemir, Mathias Preiner, Andrew Reynolds, Ying Sheng, Cesare Tinelli, and Yoni Zohar. 2022. cvc5: A Versatile and Industrial-Strength SMT Solver. In Proc. 28th Intl. Conf. Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems (TACAS 2022), Munich, Germany, April 2-7, 2022 (LNCS, Vol. 13243) . Springer, 415–442. [7] Dirk Beyer and Jan Strejček. 2025. Improvements in software verification and witness validation: SV-COMP 2025. In 

International Conference on Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems . Springer, 151–186. [8] Colin Blundell, Dimitra Giannakopoulou, and Corina S. Pasareanu. 2006. Assume-Guarantee Testing. ACM SIGSOFT Softw. Eng. Notes 31, 2 (2006). [9] Weining Cao, Guangyuan Wu, Tangzhi Xu, Yuan Yao, Hengfeng Wei, Taolue Chen, and Xiaoxing Ma. 2025. Clause2Inv: A Generate-Combine-Check Framework for Loop Invariant Inference. Proc. ACM on Software Engineering 2, ISSTA (2025), 1009–1030. [10] Adrien Champion, Tomoya Chiba, Naoki Kobayashi, and Ryosuke Sato. 2018. ICE-Based Refinement Type Discovery for Higher-Order Functional Programs. In TACAS, Part I (LNCS, Vol. 10805) . Springer, 365–384. [11] Leonardo De Moura and Nikolaj Bjørner. 2008. Z3: An Efficient SMT Solver. In Proc. 14th Intl. Conf. Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems (TACAS 2008) (Budapest, Hungary). Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 337–340. [12] P. Ezudheen, Daniel Neider, Deepak D’Souza, Pranav Garg, and P. Madhusudan. 2018. Horn-ICE learning for synthesizing invariants and contracts. PACMPL 2, OOPSLA (2018), 131:1–131:25. [13] Grigory Fedyukovich, Sumanth Prabhu, Kumar Madhukar, and Aarti Gupta. 2018. Solving Constrained Horn Clauses Using Syntax and Data. In FMCAD . IEEE, 170–178. [14] Grigory Fedyukovich, Sumanth Prabhu, Kumar Madhukar, and Aarti Gupta. 2019. Quantified Invariants via Syntax-Guided Synthesis. In CAV, Part I (LNCS, Vol. 11561) . Springer, 259–277. [15] Cormac Flanagan and K. Rustan M. Leino. 2001. Houdini, an Annotation Assistant for ESC/Java. In Proc. Intl. Symp. Formal Methods Europe (FME ’01) . Springer-Verlag, 500–517. [16] Pranav Garg, Christof Löding, P. Madhusudan, and Daniel Neider. 2014. ICE: A Robust Framework for Learning Invariants. In Proc. 26th International Conference on Computer Aided Verification CAV 2014, Vienna, Austria, 2014. (LNCS, Vol. 8559) , Armin Biere and Roderick Bloem (Eds.). Springer, 69–87. [17] Pranav Garg, Daniel Neider, P. Madhusudan, and Dan Roth. 2016. Learning invariants using decision trees and implication counterexamples. In Proc. 43rd ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symp. Principles of Programming Languages (POPL 2016), St. Petersburg, USA, 2016 , Rastislav Bodík and Rupak Majumdar (Eds.). ACM, 499–512. [18] Timon Gehr, Dimitar Dimitrov, and Martin T. Vechev. 2015. Learning Commutativity Specifications. In Proc. 27th Intl. Conf. Computer Aided Verification (CAV 2015), San Francisco, USA, July 18-24, 2015 (LNCS, Vol. 9206) . Springer, 307–323. 24 Verification Modulo Tested Library Contracts 

[19] Sergey Grebenshchikov, Nuno P. Lopes, Corneliu Popeea, and Andrey Rybalchenko. 2012. Synthesizing software verifiers from proof rules. In PLDI . ACM, 405–416. [20] Arie Gurfinkel, Temesghen Kahsai, Anvesh Komuravelli, and Jorge A. Navas. 2015. The SeaHorn Verification Frame-work. In Proc. 27th Intl. Conf. Computer Aided Verification (CAV 2015), San Francisco, USA, July 18-24, 2015 . Springer, 343–361. [21] Hossein Hojjat and Philipp Rümmer. 2018. The ELDARICA Horn Solver. In FMCAD . IEEE, 158–164. [22] Bart Jacobs and Erik Poll. 2001. A Logic for the Java Modeling Language JML. In Proc. 4th International Conference on Fundamental Approaches to Software Engineering (FASE ’01) . Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 284–299. [23] Temesghen Kahsai, Rody Kersten, Philipp Rümmer, and Martin Schäf. 2017. Quantified Heap Invariants for Object-Oriented Programs. In LPAR (EPiC Series in Computing, Vol. 46) . EasyChair, 368–384. [24] Temesghen Kahsai, Philipp Rümmer, Huascar Sanchez, and Martin Schäf. 2016. JayHorn: A Framework for Verifying Java programs. In CAV, Part I (LNCS, Vol. 9779) . Springer, 352–358. [25] Adharsh Kamath, Nausheen Mohammed, Aditya Senthilnathan, Saikat Chakraborty, Pantazis Deligiannis, Shuvendu K. Lahiri, Akash Lal, Aseem Rastogi, Subhajit Roy, and Rahul Sharma. 2024. Leveraging LLMs for Program Verification. In Proc. Formal Methods in Computer-Aided Design (FMCAD 2024), Prague, Czech Republic, October 15-18, 2024 , Nina Narodytska and Philipp Rümmer (Eds.). IEEE, 107–118. [26] Adharsh Kamath, Aditya Senthilnathan, Saikat Chakraborty, Pantazis Deligiannis, Shuvendu K Lahiri, Akash Lal, Aseem Rastogi, Subhajit Roy, and Rahul Sharma. 2023. Finding inductive loop invariants using large language models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.07948 (2023). [27] Daragh King, Vasileios Koutavas, and Laura Kovács. 2025. Llm-Based Generation of Weakest Preconditions and Precise Array Invariants. In Proc. 13th IEEE/ACM Intl. Conf. Formal Methods in Software Engineering (FormaliSE) . IEEE, 1–5. [28] Anvesh Komuravelli, Nikolaj Bjørner, Arie Gurfinkel, and Kenneth L. McMillan. 2015. Compositional verification of procedural programs using horn clauses over integers and arrays. In Proc. 15th Conf. Formal Methods in Computer-Aided Design (Austin, Texas) (FMCAD ’15) . FMCAD Inc, Austin, Texas, 89–96. [29] Anvesh Komuravelli, Arie Gurfinkel, and Sagar Chaki. 2014. SMT-Based Model Checking for Recursive Programs. In 

Proc. 26th Intl. Conf. Computer Aided Verification (CAV 2014), Vienna, Austria, July 18-22, 2014 . Springer, 17–34. [30] Sumit Lahiri and Subhajit Roy. 2022. Almost correct invariants: synthesizing inductive invariants by fuzzing proofs. In Proc. 31st ACM SIGSOFT Intl. Symp. on Software Testing and Analysis (ISSTA 2022), South Korea, July 18 - 22, 2022 ,Sukyoung Ryu and Yannis Smaragdakis (Eds.). ACM, 352–364. [31] Gary T. Leavens. 2007. Tutorial on JML, the Java Modeling Language. In Proc. 22nd IEEE/ACM Intl. Conf. Automated Software Engineering (ASE 2007) (Atlanta, Georgia, USA). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 573. [32] Francesco Logozzo. 2013. Practical specification and verification with code contracts. Ada Lett. 33, 3 (Nov. 2013), 7–8. https://doi.org/10.1145/2658982.2534188 [33] Yusuke Matsushita, Takeshi Tsukada, and Naoki Kobayashi. 2020. RustHorn: CHC-Based Verification for Rust Programs. In Programming Languages and Systems , Peter Müller (Ed.). Springer International Publishing, Cham, 484–514. [34] Kenneth L. McMillan. 2003. Interpolation and SAT-Based Model Checking. In Proc. 15th Intl. Conf. Computer Aided Verification (CAV 2003), Boulder, USA, July 8-12, 2003 (LNCS, Vol. 2725) , Warren A. Hunt Jr. and Fabio Somenzi (Eds.). Springer, 1–13. [35] Anders Miltner, Saswat Padhi, Todd D. Millstein, and David Walker. 2020. Data-driven inference of representation invariants. In Proc. 41st ACM SIGPLAN Intl, Conf. Programming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI 2020), London, UK, June 15-20, 2020 . ACM, 1–15. [36] Nausheen Mohammed, Akash Lal, Aseem Rastogi, Rahul Sharma, and Subhajit Roy. 2025. LLM Assistance for Memory Safety. In 47th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering, ICSE 2025, Ottawa, ON, Canada, April 26 -May 6, 2025 . IEEE, 1717–1728. [37] Sujit Kumar Muduli, Rohan Ravikumar Padulkar, and Subhajit Roy. 2024. Interactive Theorem Proving Modulo Fuzzing. In Proc. 36th Intl. Conf. Computer Aided Verification (CAV 2024), Montreal, QC, Canada, July 24-27, 2024 (LNCS, Vol. 14681) , Arie Gurfinkel and Vijay Ganesh (Eds.). Springer, 480–493. [38] Sujit Kumar Muduli and Subhajit Roy. 2022. Satisfiability modulo fuzzing: a synergistic combination of SMT solving and fuzzing. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 6, OOPSLA2 (2022), 1236–1263. [39] Saswat Padhi, Rahul Sharma, and Todd D. Millstein. 2016. Data-driven precondition inference with learned features. In 

Proc. 37th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI 2016), Santa Barbara, USA, June 13-17, 2016 , Chandra Krintz and Emery D. Berger (Eds.). ACM, 42–56. [40] Kexin Pei, David Bieber, Kensen Shi, Charles Sutton, and Pengcheng Yin. 2023. Can Large Language Models Reason about Program Invariants?. In International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2023, 23-29 July 2023, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA (Proc. Machine Learning Research, Vol. 202) , Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (Eds.). PMLR, 27496–27520. 25 Abhishek Uppar, Omar Muhammad, Sumanth Prabhu S, Deepak D’Souza, P. Madhusudan, and Adithya Murali 

[41] Elizabeth Polgreen, Andrew Reynolds, and Sanjit A. Seshia. 2022. Satisfiability and Synthesis Modulo Oracles. In Proc. 23rd Intl. Conf. Verification, Model Checking, and Abstract Interpretation (VMCAI 2022), Philadelphia, USA, January 16-18, 2022 (LNCS, Vol. 13182) . Springer, 263–284. [42] Sumanth Prabhu, Grigory Fedyukovich, Kumar Madhukar, and Deepak D’Souza. 2021. Specification Synthesis with Constrained Horn Clauses. In PLDI . ACM, 1203–1217. [43] Sumanth Prabhu, Kumar Madhukar, and R Venkatesh. 2018. Efficiently learning safety proofs from appearance as well as behaviours. In SAS (LNCS, Vol. 11002) . Springer, 326–343. [44] Sriram Sankaranarayanan, Swarat Chaudhuri, Franjo Ivancic, and Aarti Gupta. 2008. Dynamic inference of likely data preconditions over predicates by tree learning. In Proc. ACM/SIGSOFT Intl. Symp. on Software Testing and Analysis (ISSTA 2008), Seattle, USA, July 20-24, 2008 . ACM, 295–306. [45] Fabio Somenzi and Aaron R. Bradley. 2011. IC3: where monolithic and incremental meet. In Proc. Intl. Conf. Formal Methods in Computer-Aided Design (FMCAD 2011), Austin, USA, October 30 - November 02, 2011 , Per Bjesse and Anna Slobodová (Eds.). FMCAD Inc., 3–8. [46] Gemini Team, Petko Georgiev, Ving Ian Lei, Ryan Burnell, Libin Bai, Anmol Gulati, Garrett Tanzer, Damien Vincent, Zhufeng Pan, Shibo Wang, et al . 2024. Gemini 1.5: Unlocking multimodal understanding across millions of tokens of context. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.05530 (2024). [47] Cheng Wen, Jialun Cao, Jie Su, Zhiwu Xu, Shengchao Qin, Mengda He, Haokun Li, Shing-Chi Cheung, and Cong Tian. 2024. Enchanting program specification synthesis by large language models using static analysis and program verification. In Proc. Intl. Conf. Computer Aided Verification (CAV 2024) . Springer, 302–328. [48] Zhe Zhou, Robert Dickerson, Benjamin Delaware, and Suresh Jagannathan. 2021. Data-driven abductive inference of library specifications. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 5, OOPSLA (2021), 1–29. [49] He Zhu, Stephen Magill, and Suresh Jagannathan. 2018. A data-driven CHC solver. In PLDI . ACM, 707–721. 26 Verification Modulo Tested Library Contracts 

A Benchmark Details 

Name Lbry LOC Clnt LOC #Obs-Mthds #Mthd Specs #LoopInvs 

AlternatingList 100 15 2 1 1AtomicHashMap (1 - 5) ∼3k 17 - 28 4 1 - 2 1 - 3 AtomicLinkedList (1 - 2) ∼500 16 - 19 1 - 2 2 2BinaryHeap (1 - 2) ∼200 15 - 19 2 - 3 3 1 - 2 BinaryTree 100 - 200 14 2 2 1BlueWhite ∼100 14 1 1 2Calendar ∼100 12 2 1 1DLL_Circular ∼100 12 1 1 1DLL_Token ∼100 7 2 1 1FlatHashMap (1 - 2) ∼3k 16 - 22 3 2 1 - 2 FlatHashSet ∼3k 30 4 2 3LruCache ∼3k 19 3 2 1List (Max) ∼100 13 2 1 1List (Min) ∼100 13 2 1 1Multimap (1 - 2) ∼3k 12 - 21 2 - 3 1 1Multiset (1 - 2) ∼3k 13 - 20 2 - 3 1 1NormalFilterQueue ∼100 16 3 2 1PriorityFilterQueue ∼100 16 3 2 1ProcessQueue ∼100 15 2 2 1RedBlackTree ∼100 17 4 2 1SkipList (1 - 7) ∼1000 14 - 16 4 2 1Stack ∼50 18 1 2 1StockOrder ∼100 13 2 1 1TokenBucket(1 - 3) ∼200 15 - 18 1 2 1

Table 2. Features of Benchmarks. Columns represent: benchmark name (name), lines of code of library (Lbry LOC), lines of code of client code (Clnt LOC), number of observer methods in the library (#Obs-methods), number of methods to synthesize specifications (#Mthd Specs), and number of loops (#LoopInvs). 

B Mutation Study 

This section presents additional details of the mutation study used to evaluate the effectiveness of VMTLC beyond testing. 

> 27 Abhishek Uppar, Omar Muhammad, Sumanth Prabhu S, Deepak D’Souza, P. Madhusudan, and Adithya Murali

B.1 Results 

Mutant Benchmarks Passed by Testing Passed by Contextual VMTLC Passed by Modular VMTLC 

AtomicHashMap1Mut1 ✓ ✓ ×

AtomicHashMap1Mut2 ✓ × ×

AtomicLinkedList1Mut1 ✓ × ×

AtomicLinkedList1Mut2 ✓ × ×

BinaryTreeMut1 ✓ ✓ ×

BinaryTreeMut2 ✓ ✓ ×

BlueWhiteMut1 ✓ × ×

BlueWhiteMut2 ✓ ✓ ×

CalendarMut1 ✓ × ×

CalendarMut2 ✓ × ×

DLL_CircularMut1 ✓ ✓ ×

DLL_CircularMut2 ✓ × ×

FlatHashSetMut1 ✓ × ×

FlatHashSetMut2 ✓ × ×

MaxMut1 ✓ × ×

MaxMut2 ✓ × ×

MinMut1 ✓ × ×

MinMut2 ✓ × ×

Multimap1Mut1 ✓ ✓ ×

Multimap1Mut2 ✓ × ×

NormalFilterQueueMut1 ✓ × ×

NormalFilterQueueMut2 ✓ × ×

ProcessQueueMut1 ✓ ✓ ×

ProcessQueueMut2 ✓ ✓ ×

RedBlackTreeMut1 ✓ × ×

RedBlackTreeMut2 ✓ × ×

SkipList1Mut1 ✓ ✓ ×

SkipList1Mut2 ✓ ✓ ×

StackMut1 ✓ × ×

StackMut2 ✓ ✓ ×

Table 3. Mutant Benchmarks that passed/failed Testing(30/0), Contextual VMTLC(11/19), and Modular VMTLC(0/30) 

B.2 Mutation Templates 

To systematically introduce meaningful faults, we designed two mutation templates that inject unsafe behavior through probabilistically rare execution paths. Both templates are designed to hide unsafe states behind rare conditions that are difficult for testing to explore. 

• Mutation Template 1 

while (*) { v=* if ( v == Const) { count++ 

> 28 Verification Modulo Tested Library Contracts

} else { count=0 }if (count = 100) { rare operation } else { normal operation }//other operations }assert (client condition) }

• Mutation Template 2 

while (*) { v=* if ( v == Const) { count++ } else { count=0 }//other operations }if (count = 100) { rare operation } else{ normal operation }assert (client condition) 

B.3 Why did 11 mutations pass VMTLC verification for contextual contracts? 

The rare operations in both the above templates are difficult for the tester to explore and hence the learner is able to give any strong adequate contextual contract which the verifier can accept to prove the mutation. 

C LLM Prompts C.1 Initial Prompt for Modular Contract Generation 

You are an expert programmer specializing in formal verification with Z3Py. Your task is to define specifications for general-purpose library functions (e.g., insert, search). You will also be given a client program (in the Abstract and CHC sections) that uses these functions in a specific way. Your goal is to find a Z3Py specification for each library function that meets two conditions: (1) The specification must encapsulate the library’s behavior , meaning it must be true for any valid inputs the library function might receive, not just the specific inputs used by the client. (2) The specification must be strong enough to prove the assertions of the client program when used within its specific context. 

> 29 Abhishek Uppar, Omar Muhammad, Sumanth Prabhu S, Deepak D’Souza, P. Madhusudan, and Adithya Murali

The ultimate goal is for your generated Z3Py definitions to make all the client’s CHC rules valid. 

I. System Behavior Overview: 

Please analyze the following abstract program description to understand the intended behavior, state variables, and operations. This provides semantic context for the relations you will define. 

[Client Program Pseudo Code] 

Z3 integer variables are used to model non-deterministic choices, indicated by [*] .

II. Formal CHC Specification Context: 

Please analyze the following CHC content. This is the formal basis for your task. (1) declare-rel statements: These define the names and expected arguments (types and order) for the Python/Z3Py functions you must create. (2) declare-var statements: These list the symbolic variables used within the CHC rules. (3) rule statements: These are the most critical part. Each rule (=> antecedent_formula consequent_formula) defines a logical implication. Your Z3Py function definitions must ensure that every one of these rules translates into a VALID Z3 implication .(4) extra info: ite stands for if then else. 

[CHC Rules] 

III. Pre-defined Z3 Variables and Constants in the Testing Environment: 

The Python script where your generated functions will be inserted has ALREADY DEFINED global Z3 variables and Python constants. DO NOT redefine these in your output. The parameters of your functions will be called with these Z3 variables (or expressions derived from them) in the testing script. 

• Globally Available Z3 Integer Variables (These are examples): – len (representing current state values for some benchmarks) 

– len1 (representing next state values for some benchmarks) 

– prio_input (representing non-deterministic inputs to a loop iteration, if applicable to the benchmark) 

• Globally Available Z3 Boolean Variables (if applicable, based on declare-var ): – ret1 (e.g., for a return status) 

• Globally Available Python Constants (These are examples; refer to define-fun in CHC.txt or initial values in Abst_Program.txt for benchmark-specific constants): – INT_MAX = 32767 

– INIT_MIN_PRIO = 1 

– INIT_MAX_PACKET_SIZE = 499 

IV. Your Task: Define Z3Py Function Bodies for Declared Relations 

(1) Identify Target Functions: For each (declare-rel relation_name (Type1 Type2 ...)) statement in the CHC content (Section II), you must define a corresponding Python function. (2) Function Signatures: These are the function signatures: 

[Function Signatures] 

(3) Function Logic (The Core Task): 

• The body of each Python function must construct and return a single Z3 boolean expression. 

• This Z3 expression is the definition of the relation. 

• The logic for this expression should be derived from your understanding of the 

Abst_Program.txt (Section I) and, most importantly, by analyzing how the relation is 

> 30 Verification Modulo Tested Library Contracts

used within the rule statements of the CHC.txt (Section II). The goal is to define the relation such that all rules involving it become valid implications. 

• For example, an inv_loop function should define properties that make the CHC rules for initialization and preservation hold. An append_op function should define state changes that are consistent with the rules where append_op appears. 

V. Expected Output Format: 

Provide ONLY the complete Python code definitions for the required functions. Do not include any surrounding text, explanations, or from z3 import * . Do not redefine any global Z3 variables or constants (as per Section III). 

Example of Expected Output Structure (for a hypothetical benchmark): 

def inv_relation_from_chc(p_arg1, p_arg2): # Logic using p_arg1, p_arg2, and implicitly relying on how these # parameters will be mapped to global Z3 variables in the CHC rules. # Constants like INT_MAX can be used if they are listed in Section III. return And(p_arg1 > 0, p_arg2 < INT_MAX) def operation_relation_from_chc(p_curr_state_arg, p_next_state_arg, p_input_arg): # Logic defining the transition return (p_next_state_arg == p_curr_state_arg + p_input_arg - 1) 

VI. Additional Guidelines & Goal Clarification: 

• Primary Goal: Validity. The most important objective is that your generated Z3Py function definitions make ALL CHC rules (from Section II), when translated into Z3 implications, 

VALID .

• Plausibility: The library functions you are defining are general-purpose. For example, an insert function can accept any valid integer, even if the client program in the abstract only ever calls it with 1 and 2. 

• For the key verification conditions (like invariant preservation for different paths), the antecedent of the implication should be satisfiable. 

• Maximal Specification (Secondary Goal, Strive For): – Once validity is achieved, aim for your specifications to be "maximal." Think of a specifi-cation (like an invariant inv(state) or an operation op(current_state, next_state) )as defining a set of allowed states or state transitions. 

– A valid specification is maximal if you cannot add any more states (for an invariant) or any more input/output state pairs (for an operation) to the set it accepts without making the specification invalid (i.e., without causing one of the CHC rules to no longer hold). 

– Essentially, try to make your Z3 definitions as general or "permissive" as possible, in-cluding all behaviors that are consistent with the CHC rules and the abstract program’s intent. Avoid being overly restrictive if a more general valid definition exists. 

– There might be multiple different maximal specifications. Your goal is to find one that is as comprehensive as possible. 

– Crucially, prioritize achieving VALIDITY of all CHC rules above striving for maximality if there’s a conflict. A valid, slightly less general specification is much better than a more general but invalid one. 

• Consider edge cases (e.g., empty queues if len is a variable) as implied by the abstract program and CHC rules. 

> 31 Abhishek Uppar, Omar Muhammad, Sumanth Prabhu S, Deepak D’Souza, P. Madhusudan, and Adithya Murali

• Pay close attention to how variables declared with (declare-var ...) in the CHC rules are used as arguments to your functions within those rules. This mapping is key. 

VII. Tips 

To succeed, you MUST follow this strategic guidance: (1) Think Relationally, Not Mathematically: Your primary goal is to define the relationship between the state at one step and the state at the next. (2) Prioritize the General Function First: Your mental process should be: 

• First: Define a plausible, general-purpose library function based on common data structure behavior. 

• Then: Define the invariant ( inv1 , inv2 ) to be a property that is true for the client’s specific usage of that general function. The invariant proves the client correct; the function defines the library. (3) How to Interpret Counterexamples: When you receive a counterexample, do not just patch the code to handle that specific case. Instead, try to infer the simplest, most general logical rule that the counterexample reveals. (4) The code is not wrong: There are no issues from my side. Rethink the logic if you think you are stuck. (5) keep it simple: Try to find simple contracts that satisfy validity. 

C.2 Initial Prompt for contextual contract generation 

You are an expert programmer specializing in formal verification with Z3Py. Your task is to analyze a client program (described in the Abstract and CHC sections) and define Z3Py specifications for the relations it uses. Your goal is to find a specification that is true for the relations within the specific context of the client program’s execution flow. The ultimate goal is for these generated contextual specifications to make all the client’s CHC rules valid. 

I. System Behavior Overview: 

Please analyze the following abstract program description to understand the intended behavior, state variables, and operations. This provides semantic context for the relations you will define. 

Insert the abstract program description below: 

[Client Program Pseudo Code] 

Z3 integer variables are used to model non-deterministic choices, indicated by [*] .

II. Formal CHC Specification Context: 

Please analyze the following CHC content. This is the formal basis for your task. (1) declare-rel statements: These define the names and expected arguments (types and order) for the Python/Z3Py functions you must create. (2) declare-var statements: These list the symbolic variables used within the CHC rules. (3) rule statements: These are the most critical part. Each rule (=> antecedent_formula consequent_formula) defines a logical implication. Your Z3Py function definitions must ensure that every one of these rules translates into a VALID Z3 implication .(4) extra info: ite stands for if then else. 

Insert the CHC content below: 

[CHC] 

III. Pre-defined Z3 Variables and Constants in the Testing Environment: 

> 32 Verification Modulo Tested Library Contracts

The Python script where your generated functions will be inserted has ALREADY DEFINED global Z3 variables and Python constants. DO NOT redefine these in your output. The parameters of your functions will be called with these Z3 variables (or expressions derived from them) in the testing script. 

• Globally Available Z3 Integer Variables (These are examples): – len (representing current state values for some benchmarks) 

– len1 (representing next state values for some benchmarks) 

– prio_input (representing non-deterministic inputs to a loop iteration, if applicable to the benchmark) 

• Globally Available Z3 Boolean Variables (if applicable, based on declare-var ): – ret1 (e.g., for a return status) 

• Globally Available Python Constants (These are examples; refer to define-fun in CHC.txt or initial values in Abst_Program.txt for benchmark-specific constants): – INT_MAX = 32767 

– INIT_MIN_PRIO = 1 

– INIT_MAX_PACKET_SIZE = 499 

IV. Your Task: Define Z3Py Function Bodies for Declared Relations 

(1) Identify Target Functions: For each (declare-rel relation_name (Type1 Type2 ...)) statement in the CHC content (Section II), you must define a corresponding Python function. (2) Function Signatures: These are the function signatures. Do not define any other function beyond these.: Insert the function signatures below: 

[signatures] 

(3) Function Logic (The Core Task): 

• The body of each Python function must construct and return a single Z3 boolean expression. 

• This Z3 expression is the definition of the relation. 

• The logic for this expression should be derived from your understanding of the 

Abst_Program.txt (Section I) and, most importantly, by analyzing how the relation is used within the rule statements of the CHC.txt (Section II). The goal is to define the relation such that all rules involving it become valid implications. 

• For example, an inv_loop function should define properties that make the CHC rules for initialization and preservation hold. An append_op function should define state changes that are consistent with the rules where append_op appears. 

V. Expected Output Format: 

Provide ONLY the complete Python code definitions for the required functions. Do not include any surrounding text, explanations, or from z3 import * . Do not redefine any global Z3 variables or constants (as per Section III). 

Example of Expected Output Structure (for a hypothetical benchmark): 

def inv_relation_from_chc(p_arg1, p_arg2): # Logic using p_arg1, p_arg2, and implicitly relying on how these # parameters will be mapped to global Z3 variables in the CHC rules. # Constants like INT_MAX can be used if they are listed in Section III. return And(p_arg1 > 0, p_arg2 < INT_MAX) def operation_relation_from_chc(p_curr_state_arg, p_next_state_arg, p_input_arg): 

> 33 Abhishek Uppar, Omar Muhammad, Sumanth Prabhu S, Deepak D’Souza, P. Madhusudan, and Adithya Murali

# Logic defining the transition return (p_next_state_arg == p_curr_state_arg + p_input_arg - 1) 

VI. Additional Guidelines & Goal Clarification: 

• Primary Goal: Validity. The most important objective is that your generated Z3Py func-tion definitions make ALL CHC rules (from Section II), when translated into Z3 implications, 

VALID . These function definitions will be tested against their corresponding library func-tions only on inputs that occur in the execution of the Client Program (Abstract). 

• For the key verification conditions (like invariant preservation for different paths), the antecedent of the implication should be satisfiable. 

• Consider edge cases (e.g., empty queues if len is a variable) as implied by the abstract program and CHC rules. 

• Pay close attention to how variables declared with (declare-var ...) in the CHC rules are used as arguments to your functions within those rules. This mapping is key. 

VII. Tips 

To succeed, you MUST follow this strategic guidance: (1) Think Relationally, Not Mathematically: Your primary goal is to define the relationship between the state at one step and the state at the next. (2) How to Interpret Counterexamples: When you receive a counterexample, do not just patch the code to handle that specific case. Instead, try to infer the simplest, most general logical rule that the counterexample reveals. (3) The code is not wrong: There are no issues from my side. Rethink the logic if you think you are stuck. (4) keep it simple: Try to find simple contracts that satisfy validity. 

C.3 Repair Prompt for Z3 Validity Failures 

The previous Z3 code was invalid. The validator failed with this output: 

[Validity Checker Report] 

Your task is to fix the code based on the validator’s output. Respond with ONLY the complete, corrected, and runnable Python code for all functions. Do not include any explanations, apologies, introductory text, or markdown formatting like “‘python. Your entire response must be valid Python code. 

C.4 Repair Prompt for Testing Failures 

The previous Z3 specification was valid but failed testing. The counterexample data is: 

[Tester Report] 

Your task is to analyze the counterexample and provide a new, corrected version of the Z3 code to fix the logical flaw. Respond with ONLY the complete, corrected, and runnable Python code for all functions. Do not include any explanations, introductory text, or markdown formatting like “‘python. Your entire response must be valid Python code. 

> 34 Verification Modulo Tested Library Contracts

C.5 Initial Prompt for HornICE+LLM 

You are an expert in program semantics and formal verification. Your primary task is to analyze an abstract program description and its corresponding CHC specification. For each relation declared in the CHC file (like inv , insert , etc.), you will generate a textual description of its parameters and a list of core arithmetic and logical sub-expressions that describe the relationships between those parameters. 

I. System Behavior Overview: 

Please analyze the following abstract program description to understand the intended behavior, state variables, and operations. This provides semantic context for the relations you will analyze. 

[Client Program Pseudo Code] 

II. Formal CHC Specification Context: 

Please analyze the following CHC content. This content primarily serves to: 

• Identify the names and expected arguments (types and order) for the Python functions you must create (from declare-rel statements). 

• Provide context on how these relations are used in logical rules, which will inform the plausible semantics you need to model. 

• List the symbolic variables involved (from declare-var statements). 

[CHC Rules] 

III. Pre-defined Variable and Constant Context: 

The CHC file may use pre-defined constants. Your analysis should be consistent with these definitions. Example: (define-fun INT_MAX () Int 32767) means INT_MAX is 32767. 

IV. Your Task: Generate Textual Expression Sets for Each Relation 

For each relation defined by a (declare-rel ...) statement in Section II, you must: 

• Analyze its plausible behavior based on its name, its arguments, the abstract program, and its usage in the CHC rules. 

• Identify the core arithmetic relationships between its parameters. For example, if a relation describes len1 = len + 1 , a key expression is len1 - len .

• Format your output for that relation exactly as described in Section V below. 

Function Signatures: These are the function signatures: 

[Function Signatures] 

Function Logic (The Core Task): 

From the behavior of these functions, you will extract key arithmetic or boolean terms. 

Canonical Form: Where possible, express relationships as terms that would be compared to zero. For example, if you infer a behavior x = y + 2 , the corresponding expression to return in the list would be x - y . If you infer a > b , a good expression would be a - b .

V. Expected Output Format: 

Provide your response as a block of text. For each relation, you must generate a multi-line entry strictly following this format: 

• A header line: <relation_name> <num_parameters> <num_expressions> 

• A list of parameter mappings, one per line: <index> <parameter_name> 

• A list of the extracted expressions, one per line, using the parameter names you just defined. 

> 35 Abhishek Uppar, Omar Muhammad, Sumanth Prabhu S, Deepak D’Souza, P. Madhusudan, and Adithya Murali

Example of the Required Output Format (for a hypothetical benchmark): 

insert 5 7 0 n 1 min 2 min1 3 isEmpty 4 isEmpty1 n - min1 min1 - n n - min min - n min1 - min min - min1 min1 - n search 4 2 0 v 1 min 2 isEmpty 3 ret1 v - min min - v 

VI. Goal Clarification: Primary Goal: Useful Expressions. Your goal is to provide a rich set of fundamental expres-sions (building blocks). A downstream solver will take these expressions e and try to find a valid specification by combining them into predicates of the form e > c , or e = c (where c is a constant). Your generated expressions should be these e terms. 

Completeness: Aim to provide a comprehensive set of simple expressions that capture the relationships. For example, if a and b are compared, providing both a - b and b - a can be useful for the solver. 

C.6 initial prompt for hornice+llm (contextual) 

You are an expert in program semantics and formal verification. Your task is to analyze a specific client program and its corresponding CHC specification. For each relation (like inv, insert, etc.), you will generate a list of core arithmetic sub-expressions. These expressions must describe the relationships between the function parameters only as they occur within the specific execution flow of the client program. 

I. System Behavior Overview: 

Please analyze the following abstract program description to understand the intended behavior, state variables, and operations. This client program description defines the exact execution context for your analysis. The expressions you generate must be consistent with the state changes and variable values that can occur within this specific program. 

[Client Program Pseudo Code] 

II. Formal CHC Specification Context: 

Please analyze the following CHC content. This content primarily serves to: 

> 36 Verification Modulo Tested Library Contracts

• Identify the names and expected arguments (types and order) for the Python functions you must create (from declare-rel statements). 

• Provide context on how these relations are used in logical rules, which will inform the plausible semantics you need to model. 

• List the symbolic variables involved (from declare-var statements). 

[CHC Rules] 

III. Pre-defined Variable and Constant Context: 

The CHC file may use pre-defined constants. Your analysis should be consistent with these definitions. 

Example: (define-fun INT_MAX () Int 32767) means INT_MAX is 32767. 

IV. Your Task: Generate Textual Expression Sets for Each Relation 

For each relation defined by a (declare-rel ...) statement in Section II, you must: 

• Analyze its plausible behavior based on its name, its arguments, the abstract program, and its usage in the CHC rules. 

• Identify the core arithmetic relationships between its parameters. For example, if a relation describes len1 = len + 1 , a key expression is len1 - len .

• Format your output for that relation exactly as described in Section V below. 

Function Signatures: These are the function signatures: 

[Function Signatures] 

Function Logic (The Core Task): 

• From the behavior of these functions, you will extract key arithmetic or boolean terms. 

• Canonical Form: Where possible, express relationships as terms that would be compared to zero. For example, if you infer a behavior x = y + 2 , the corresponding expression to return in the list would be x - y . If you infer a > b , a good expression would be a - b .

V. Expected Output Format: 

Provide your response as a block of text. For each relation, you must generate a multi-line entry strictly following this format: 

• A header line: <relation_name> <num_parameters> <num_expressions> 

• A list of parameter mappings, one per line: <index> <parameter_name> 

• A list of the extracted expressions, one per line, using the parameter names you just defined. 

Example of the Required Output Format (for a hypothetical benchmark): 

insert 5 7 0 n 1 min 2 min1 3 isEmpty 4 isEmpty1 n - min1 min1 - n n - min min - n min1 - min min - min1 min1 - n 

> 37 Abhishek Uppar, Omar Muhammad, Sumanth Prabhu S, Deepak D’Souza, P. Madhusudan, and Adithya Murali

search 4 2 0 v 1 min 2 isEmpty 3 ret1 v - min min - v 

VI. Goal Clarification: 

• Primary Goal: Useful Expressions. Your goal is to provide a rich set of fundamental expressions (building blocks). A downstream solver will take these expressions e and try to find a valid specification by combining them into predicates of the form e > c , or e = c 

(where c is a constant). Your generated expressions should be these e terms. 

• Completeness: Aim to provide a comprehensive set of simple expressions that capture the relationships. For example, if a and b are compared, providing both a - b and b - a can be useful for the solver. 

• Focus on Context, Not Generality: The expressions you generate should model the function’s behavior only as it’s called by the client program. For example, if the client’s logic ensures an insert function is only ever called with positive integers, your expressions should reflect this constraint. You do not need to generate expressions for behaviors that are impossible within this specific client’s execution flow. 

• Allowed Symbols: Each expression should be constructed using variable names, and the symbols: (, ), +, -. Integers, logical expressions etc are not allowed.