Title: Are Benchmark Tests Strong Enough? Mutation-Guided Diagnosis and Augmentation of Regression Suites

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.01518v1

Published Time: Fri, 03 Apr 2026 00:23:19 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
# Are Benchmark Tests Strong Enough? Mutation-Guided Diagnosis and Augmentation of Regression Suites 

# Chenglin Li 

SPEAR Lab, Concordia University Montreal, Quebec, Canada chenglin.li@mail.concordia.ca 

# Yisen Xu 

SPEAR Lab, Concordia University Montreal, Quebec, Canada yisen.xu@mail.concordia.ca 

# Zehao Wang 

SPEAR Lab, Concordia University Montreal, Quebec, Canada w_zeha@encs.concordia.ca 

# Shin Hwei Tan 

Concordia University Montreal, Quebec, Canada shinhwei.tan@concordia.ca 

# Tse-Hsun (Peter) Chen 

SPEAR Lab, Concordia University Montreal, Quebec, Canada peterc@encs.concordia.ca 

## Abstract 

Benchmarks driven by test suites, notably SWE-bench, have become the de facto standard for measuring the effectiveness of automated issue-resolution agents: a generated patch is accepted whenever it passes the accompanying regression tests. In practice, however, insufficiently strong test suites can admit plausible yet semantically incorrect patches, inflating reported success rates. We introduce STING, a framework for targeted test augmentation that uses seman-tically altered program variants as diagnostic stressors to uncover and repair weaknesses in benchmark regression suites. Variants of the ground-truth patch that still pass the existing tests reveal under-constrained behaviors; these gaps then guide the genera-tion of focused regression tests. A generated test is retained only if it (i) passes on the ground-truth patch, (ii) fails on at least one variant that survived the original suite, and (iii) remains valid un-der behavior-preserving transformations designed to guard against overfitting. Applied to SWE-bench Verified, STING finds that 77% of instances contain at least one surviving variant. STING pro-duces 1,014 validated tests spanning 211 instances and increases patch-region line and branch coverage by 10.8 and 9.5 percentage points, respectively. Re-assessing the top-10 repair agents with the strengthened suites lowers their resolved rates by 4.2%–9.0%, reveal-ing that a substantial share of previously passing patches exploit weaknesses in the benchmark tests rather than faithfully imple-menting the intended fix. These results underscore that reliable benchmark evaluation depends not only on patch generation, but equally on test adequacy. 

## CCS Concepts 

• Software and its engineering → Software maintenance tools ;

Software testing and debugging . 

> Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
> Conference acronym ’XX, Woodstock, NY
> ©2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/2018/06 https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX

## Keywords 

Automated program repair, Benchmark evaluation, Test augmenta-tion, Large language models, SWE-bench 

ACM Reference Format: 

Chenglin Li, Yisen Xu, Zehao Wang, Shin Hwei Tan, and Tse-Hsun (Pe-ter) Chen. 2018. Are Benchmark Tests Strong Enough? Mutation-Guided Diagnosis and Augmentation of Regression Suites. In Proceedings of Make sure to enter the correct conference title from your rights confirmation email (Conference acronym ’XX). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 12 pages. https: //doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX 

## 1 Introduction 

Large language models (LLMs) have recently driven rapid progress in automated issue-resolution agents [ 1, 11 , 12 , 14 , 18 , 35 , 42 , 43 ], with benchmarks such as SWE-bench [ 24 ] serving as a primary yardstick. In this evaluation paradigm, a generated patch is accepted whenever it passes a provided set of regression tests. Because of its scalability and reproducibility, this test-based protocol has be-come the standard basis on which advances in issue resolution are reported. The reliability of this protocol, however, hinges on a key presup-position: that the regression tests encode the intended behavior of the fix with sufficient completeness. In practice, this assumption seldom holds. Benchmark regression tests are typically authored to confirm the symptoms reported in an issue, not to comprehen-sively specify the full behavioral intent of the corresponding fix. Consequently, patches that are plausible yet semantically incom-plete can still satisfy every test. This phenomenon, often called test-suite overfitting [ 33 , 34 ], systematically inflates reported agent performance. Several recent investigations [ 2 , 40 , 47 ] confirm that even care-fully vetted benchmarks such as SWE-bench Verified [ 5] accept a non-trivial fraction of behaviorally incorrect patches. As a result, current benchmarks risk equating test passage with semantic cor-rectness, yielding misleading assessments of agent capabilities and potentially misdirecting future research. Despite growing awareness of this issue, existing countermea-sures suffer from three notable shortcomings. First, some stud-ies [ 2] depend on manual inspection of patches, identifying incor-rect fixes retroactively rather than proactively strengthening the evaluation harness. Second, certain test-generation efforts target-ing SWE-bench [ 40 ] are designed to separate AI-generated patches  

> arXiv:2604.01518v1 [cs.SE] 2 Apr 2026 Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY Trovato et al.

from human-written ones—a goal that does not directly improve test-suite adequacy. Third, augmentation approaches such as UT-Boost [ 47 ] treat gap detection and test generation as independent steps, omitting a diagnostic phase that would pinpoint which be-haviors remain under-specified. Without such diagnosis, newly generated tests risk re-exercising already well-covered function-ality while leaving critical behavioral gaps unaddressed. Unifying test-inadequacy diagnosis with targeted test synthesis in a single framework remains an open challenge. In this work, we contend that more reliable evaluation of issue-resolution agents demands a shift from passively relying on existing test suites to actively strengthening them through adequacy-driven augmentation. We present STING , a framework that uses semanti-cally modified program variants as diagnostic stressors to system-atically uncover and repair weaknesses in regression test suites. The central idea is that a variant of the reference patch that passes every existing test yet deviates from the intended semantics reveals an under-constrained behavior in the suite. 

STING combines two complementary variant-generation strate-gies: (1) operator-based mutation, which introduces fine-grained, localized changes via predefined transformation rules, and (2) LLM-based mutation, which produces context-aware modifications that fixed operators alone are unlikely to reach. Variants that survive the original tests then serve as contrastive signals for synthesizing targeted regression tests. Each candidate test must meet three ac-ceptance criteria before being added to the augmented suite: it must (i) pass on the reference patch, (ii) fail on at least one surviving variant, and (iii) remain robust under behavior-preserving trans-formations and LLM-based screening, thereby avoiding overfitting to implementation-specific details. By tightly integrating diagno-sis with augmentation, STING directly addresses the root cause of unreliable benchmark evaluation. We evaluate STING on SWE-bench Verified, examining both test-suite adequacy and its downstream effect on agent assessment. Our experiments reveal pervasive under-constraining of test suites, with a large majority of benchmark instances accepting incorrect yet test-passing variants. By injecting targeted behavioral checks, the framework produces measurable drops in reported success rates and alters the relative ordering of leading agents. These findings highlight that strengthening evaluation is indispensable for drawing trustworthy conclusions about repair capabilities. 

Contributions. This paper makes the following contributions: 

• Approach. We introduce STING , a variant-guided frame-work that diagnoses behavioral gaps through surviving pro-gram variants and synthesizes targeted tests to eliminate those gaps. 

• Empirical Study. We carry out a large-scale evaluation on SWE-bench Verified, providing quantitative evidence of widespread test-suite inadequacy and its consequences for evaluation reliability. Our analysis shows that 77% of in-stances admit at least one surviving variant and identifies four recurring patterns of test weakness: Insufficient Input Space Exploration, Partial Patch Path Coverage, Weak As-sertions, and Missing Environmental Context. 

• Impact on Evaluation. We demonstrate that the augmented tests produced by STING yield more discriminative evalua-tion: resolved rates of the top-10 repair agents drop by 4.2% to 9.0% on SWE-bench Verified, and the relative ranking of agents on the leaderboard shifts accordingly. 

• Insights. We analyze the categories of behavioral checks that the generated tests introduce, offering practical guidance on how targeted augmentation improves the detection of incorrect patches. 

## 2 Background and Related Work 2.1 Background 

We study this problem in the context of SWE-bench [ 24 ], a repository-level benchmark in which each instance pairs an issue description with a reference patch and regression tests drawn from the corre-sponding pull request. Benchmark construction pipelines generally adopt these developer-submitted tests as-is, without additional re-view or augmentation of their behavioral coverage. Recent studies have found that a substantial fraction of patches accepted on SWE-bench Verified are behaviorally incorrect [ 2, 40 , 47 ], confirming that this lack of test scrutiny has practical consequences. This raises our central question: To what extent do SWE-bench regression test suites behaviorally constrain intended fixes, and can we systematically strengthen them? 

Figure 1 illustrates this problem with a real example from SWE-bench Verified ( django-11276 [32 ]). The issue modifies how escape() 

formats its output. Although this change targets a single function, the new output format also affects urlize() , a downstream func-tion that consumes and reverses the escaped text before process-ing URLs. The oracle patch updates both functions to keep them consistent. In contrast, the patch submitted by Trae [ 14 ] updates only escape() , leaving urlize() expecting the old format. This patch passes all existing tests because the developer tests check only the local escape output—no test exercises the downstream URL-processing path. This example highlights a recurring test weakness: existing tests may accept patches that fix the visible symptom while omitting semantically necessary downstream changes. STING addresses this gap in two steps. First, it generates a surviving variant that mutates the urlize() logic yet still passes all original tests, confirming that the downstream path is unconstrained. Second, guided by this variant, STING generates a test that checks the end-to-end pipeline, feeding an entity through both escape() and urlize() 

and asserting on the final URL output. This test passes on the oracle patch but fails on the plausible patch, exposing the missing downstream update. By automatically generating targeted tests from surviving variants, STING provides a practical, fully automated mechanism for improving benchmark reliability without requiring manual test authoring or domain-specific knowledge. 

## 2.2 Related Work 

Test Suite Weakness in Coding Benchmarks. The reliability of benchmark-based evaluation is bounded by the strength of its test oracles, a problem first characterized as test-suite overfitting in the APR literature [ 33 , 34 ], and several countermeasures have Are Benchmark Tests Strong Enough? Mutation-Guided Diagnosis and Augmentation of Regression Suites Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY 

(a.) Oracle patch: updates both functions 

> def escape(text): ... # developer patch modified it to change text’s format def urlize(text): ... # developer patch modified it to reverse the format change

(b). Plausible patch (by Trae): patch provided only for escape()     

> def escape(text): ✓patch provided def urlize(text): ×NO patch provided

(c). Developer test: checks escape() output only   

> assert escape(input) == expected_entity ✓passes on both patches

(d). Generated test (by STING ): checks both functions      

> assert escape(input) == expected_entity ✓passes on both patches assert urlize(url_with_entity) == expected_url
> ✓passes on oracle patch ×fails on Trae’s plausible patch

Figure 1: Motivating example (simplified django-11276 for easier understanding). The output of escape() is consumed by urlize() . The oracle patch updates both functions, but the plausible patch modifies only escape() . The developer test checks only the local output and passes on both patches, missing the incomplete fix. STING ’s generated test instead exercises the end-to-end pipeline and reveals the missing update in urlize() .

been proposed, including anti-pattern filtering [ 37 ] and differential test generation [ 45 , 46 ]. Recent studies confirm that this risk per-sists at scale. On SWE-bench Verified, 29.6% of plausible patches are behaviorally incorrect [ 40 ], and resolution rates drop signifi-cantly after filtering weak tests [ 2, 47 ]. Beyond issue benchmarks, EvalPlus [ 27 ] reveals 15–20% pass-rate drops on HumanEval [ 8]and MBPP [ 3] under strengthened tests. These findings establish that weak test oracles are a systemic bottleneck across benchmark paradigms, motivating automated approaches to strengthen them. 

Mutation Testing. Mutation testing assesses test suite adequacy by injecting small syntactic faults and checking whether tests detect them [ 23 , 30 ]. Classical operator-based tools such as Mutpy [ 19 ], Mutmut [ 21 ], and Cosmic Ray [ 6 ] apply predefined operators to indi-vidual constructs, while higher-order mutation composes multiple operators to approximate real faults [ 25 ]. More recently, LLM-based approaches such as 𝜇 BERT [ 10 ] and LLMorpheus [ 39 ] generate context-sensitive, naturalistic mutants that extend the behavioral space beyond what fixed operators can reach. STING leverages both strategies but shifts the role of mutation from assessment to targeted diagnosis and augmentation: surviving variants serve as diagnostic signals that drive focused test generation. 

Test Augmentation and Oracle Improvement. Approaches to strengthening test suites can be broadly grouped by their generation strategy. Search-based tools, such as EvoSuite [ 13 ] and Pynguin [ 28 ], optimize for structural coverage criteria. LLM-based approaches generate semantically richer tests by conditioning on code context and natural-language specifications [ 26 , 48 ]. In the APR context, Xin and Reiss [ 45 ] generate tests via symbolic execution to distin-guish correct patches from overfitted ones, and Yang et al. [ 46 ] use specification-guided generation for patch assessment. For oracle quality specifically, Jahangirova et al. [ 22 ] use mutation testing to identify false positives and false negatives in existing oracles, and Xie [ 44 ] augments test suites with regression oracle check-ing by capturing object states and asserting on observer methods. EvalPlus [ 27 ] augments function-level benchmarks with LLM- and mutation-based test input generation. Three recent works are most closely related to STING . Wang et al. [ 40 ] identify behaviorally incorrect patches on SWE-bench Veri-fied through retrospective empirical analysis, but do not generate stronger tests to prevent such patches from being accepted. Meta’s ACH [ 17 ] combines mutation and LLM-based test generation, but targets production-level regression hardening where fault classes are provided by engineers rather than discovered automatically. UTBoost [ 47 ] is most directly comparable, generating tests from code context and issue descriptions to strengthen SWE-bench eval-uation. Unlike STING , however, its weakness detection and test validation are both coupled to the availability of agent-generated patches, making adequacy assessment dependent on the particular agents under evaluation rather than an independent property of the benchmark. All prior approaches share an important intuition: additional tests can reveal errors missed by the original suite. What they do not address is where the existing test suite is behaviorally in-sufficient, which semantic regions remain under-constrained, and which of those regions would benefit most from addi-tional testing. Without this diagnostic step, generated tests may redundantly exercise already well-tested behaviors while leaving critical gaps untouched. STING addresses this limitation by decou-pling weakness identification from test generation. It first uses program variants to diagnose under-constrained behaviors, then uses the resulting surviving variants as contrastive signals for tar-geted test synthesis. Finally, it validates generated tests through behavior-preserving transformations to guard against overfitting to the oracle patch. This end-to-end process, from diagnosis to generation to validation, distinguishes STING from prior work that treats test generation and oracle assessment as separate concerns. 

## 3 Approach 

To address under-constrained regression test suites in real-world issue benchmarks, we propose STING : a diagnostic-driven test aug-mentation framework. Given a verified reference patch 𝑃 𝑔𝑡 and its associated regression test suite 𝑇 , STING produces an augmented suite 𝑇 ′ ⊇ 𝑇 that more tightly constrains the intended behavior of the fix. A strong test suite should not only accept the correct fix, but also reject plausible yet incorrect alternatives. STING opera-tionalizes this intuition by using semantically modified variants of 

𝑃 𝑔𝑡 as diagnostic stressors: if a variant passes all tests in 𝑇 despite deviating from 𝑃 𝑔𝑡 , it reveals a behavioral gap in the suite. STING 

then generates targeted tests to close that gap. Figure 2 illustrates the overall workflow of STING . Given 𝑃 𝑔𝑡 

and 𝑇 , STING proceeds through four stages: (1) Program Variant Generation produces semantically modified variants of 𝑃 𝑔𝑡 that are syntactically valid and interface-compatible (§3.1); (2) Assessing Test Adequacy via Program Variants executes 𝑇 against each variant, collecting those that pass as evidence of behavioral gaps (§3.2); (3) Program Variant-Guided Test Generation generates new tests guided by the surviving variants as contrastive signals (§3.3); and (4) Test Validation and Selection ensures generated tests pass on 𝑃 𝑔𝑡 while rejecting at least one surviving variant, Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY Trovato et al. T

Augment suite T’ 

correctness 

Effectiveness 

Robustness 

Tnew 

Behavioral Differentiation 

Intent Alignment Tcandidates 

③ Targeted test generation ④ Validation 

Behavioral Differentiation 

① Program Variant Generation 

LLM -Based 

mutation 

Operator -Based 

Mutation 

Equivalent mutant detection 

Superficial modification filter 

Structural diff filter 

Post -processing                     

> def escape (text) :
> +...
> def urlize (...) :
> +...
> def escape (text) :
> +...
> def urlize (...) :
> +...
> def escape (text) :
> +...Mutation ...
> def urlize (...) :
> +... Mutation...
> def escape (text) :
> +...
> def urlize (...) :
> +...
> def escape (text) :
> +... Mutation ...
> def urlize (...) :
> +... Mutation ...

Pass     

> def escape (text) :
> +... def escape (text) :
> +... Mutation ...

Fail 

> (Discard)

Surviving Variants Vs

Original Test suites T

② Assessing Test Adequacy via 

Program Variants 

Original Test suites T

Contractive LLM Reasoning 

Generate tests to Identify 

unconstrained behaviors between 

Pgt and vs

Candidates Suites 

Correctness 

Effectiveness 

Robustness to 

test -overfitting 

Test Validation 

LLM 

Augmented suite T’     

> def escape (text) :
> +...
> def urlize (...) :
> +...

③ Program Variant -Guided Test Generation 

Pgt 

④ Test Validation and Selection 

SWE -Bench Verifie d

Merge with T 

> Execute T on
> each v in V

Program Variants V 

Figure 2: Overview of the STING framework. 

admitting only behaviorally meaningful additions to 𝑇 ′ = 𝑇 ∪ 𝑇 𝑛𝑒𝑤 

(§3.4). 

Table 1: Mutation operators derived from established testing tools and research. 

Category Operator Transformation Example Source Predicate & Boolean Logic condfalse condition → False [21] condtrue condition → True [21] condflip negate predicate [6] boolswap and ↔ or [6, 19, 21] boollit replace boolean literal [6, 19, 21] eqflip == ↔ != [6, 19, 21] cmpbound > ↔ >= [6, 19, 21] Arithmetic & Numeric numlit modify numeric literal [6, 19, 21] strlit modify string literal [21] arithop change arithmetic operator [6, 19] none2zero None → 0 [19] len2zero len(x) → 0 [19] len2one len(x) → 1 [19] Return & Default retNone return x → return None [6, 19] pass2none pass → return None [19] Loop & Iteration reverseloop reverse iteration order [6] brkcont break ↔ continue [6, 19, 21] oneloop limit loop to single iteration [6] zeroloop skip loop body [6] rangepp modify range bounds [19] Data Access & Slicing listidx modify list indexing [19] dictget dict[k] → dict.get(k) [19] slicedel remove slice operation [19] sliceleft modify slice start [6, 19] sliceright modify slice end [6, 19] Exception Handling exctype change exception type [6] excswallow raise E → pass [6] Structural Transformations decdel delete decorator [6, 19] compfilterdel [x for x in L if p] → [x for x in L] [6, 19] unaryop modify unary operator [6, 19] bitwiseop modify bitwise operator [6, 19] augassign modify augmented assignment [6, 19, 21] ## Task : Generate a modified patch variant that introduces a semantic 

deviation from the reference implementation while remaining syntactically 

valid and interface -compatible, and still likely to pass the existing 

regression tests .

## Inputs : [ Issue description] [Reference patch 𝑃 𝑔 𝑡 ] [Regression tests 𝑇 ]

## Output : Return a semantic modified variant and modification description .

## Constraints 

• Do not modify test cases 

• Avoid trivial bypass patterns (e.g ., unconditional returns )

• Preserve public interfaces and coding style 

## Guidelines :

• Perform a local behavioral modification near the reference patch 

• Possible mutation directions: condition changes, boundary adjustments, 

return -value changes or control -flow modifications 

• The variant should resemble a plausible but slightly incorrect developer 

implementation 

Figure 3: Simplified Prompt template used in LLM-based Mutation 

## 3.1 Program Variant Generation 

STING generates a set of program variants by applying controlled mutations to the reference patch 𝑃 𝑔𝑡 . These variants act as behav-ioral probes: variants that pass all tests in 𝑇 but differ from 𝑃 𝑔𝑡 

reveal gaps in the test suite. To focus on behavior introduced by the fix, STING restricts all transformations to the patch region , defined by the location of the modified lines in 𝑃 𝑔𝑡 . If the modified lines fall inside a function body, the patch region is defined as the enclos-ing function, allowing access to relevant surrounding logic (e.g., branches and return paths). If the patch spans multiple functions, each function is treated as a separate patch region. For patches out-side any function (e.g., module-level statements), the patch region consists of the modified lines. 

STING generates program variants using two complementary strategies and filters them to retain only valid and informative ones, yielding the final set 𝑉 .Are Benchmark Tests Strong Enough? Mutation-Guided Diagnosis and Augmentation of Regression Suites Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY 

Algorithm 1 Identifying Surviving Variants                                     

> Require: Program variant set 𝑉 , regression test suite 𝑇
> Ensure: Surviving variant set 𝑉 𝑠
> 1: 𝑉 𝑠 ← ∅
> 2: for all 𝑣 ∈𝑉 do
> 3: result ←RunTests (𝑇 , 𝑣 )
> 4: if result contains environment errors or timeouts then
> 5: continue
> 6: end if
> 7: if result passes all tests in 𝑇 then
> 8: 𝑉 𝑠 ←𝑉 𝑠 ∪ { 𝑣 }
> 9: end if
> 10: end for
> 11: return 𝑉 𝑠

(i) Operator-based Mutation. STING applies 32 predefined mutation operators to the patch region to produce fine-grained, interpretable variations (Table 1), spanning seven categories. These operators are adapted from widely used Python mutation testing tools, Mutmut [ 21 ] Mutpy [ 19 ] and Cosmic Ray [ 6]. Prior empiri-cal studies have shown that these operators can effectively induce meaningful semantic changes in Python programs [ 16 ]. For each patch and each transformation type, STING performs 10 indepen-dent mutation attempts. In each attempt, the transformation is applied only if the patch region contains at least one compati-ble code location (e.g., eqflip requires a comparison expression). When multiple compatible locations are available, STING randomly selects one and applies the transformation, producing one vari-ant per attempt. Each run produces one variant with a single-site modification. 

(ii) LLM-based Mutation. To explore higher-level behavioral in addition to operator-based mutation, STING prompts an LLM with the issue description, 𝑃 𝑔𝑡 , and the existing tests 𝑇 . As shown in Figure 3, the prompt instructs the model to generate interface-compatible program variants that differ in behavior from 𝑃 𝑔𝑡 , such as altering conditional logic, adjusting boundary handling, or re-structuring control flow. The existing tests 𝑇 are provided so that the model can reason about which behaviors are already constrained and target deviations more likely to survive the current suite. The prompt further excludes trivial bypass patterns (e.g., unconditional returns) and pure refactoring, as such changes do not represent meaningful behavioral deviations. Unlike operator-based mutation, LLM-based mutation can introduce coordinated changes across multiple program elements, such as jointly modifying a predicate and its corresponding return value. For each instance, we query the LLM 10 times with the same prompt. If a response duplicates a previously generated variant, it is discarded and re-queried to ensure diversity. 

Post-processing. Although our mutation operators are designed to induce genuine semantic changes, and our LLM-based guidelines explicitly encourage behaviorally divergent program variants, it is still difficult to guarantee that all generated variants represent meaningful behavioral deviations. Some may be syntactically dif-ferent but semantically equivalent to the oracle patch, which would create false signals of test weakness and introduce noise into down-stream test generation. To ensure that only genuinely divergent variants guide test synthesis, we apply three layers of filtering. First, duplicates and variants that modify only superficial elements,such as comments, formatting, docstrings, and logging messages, are discarded. Second, following Tian et al. [ 38 ], who demonstrated that LLMs can effectively distinguish equivalent from non-equivalent mutants, we use their prompting template to screen each variant and remove those classified as equivalent rewrites. Third, a struc-tural diff filter retains only variants whose modifications align with the oracle patch in scope (same modified files, no additional hunks) and whose normalized code changes are not reducible to identifier renaming, message reformatting, or code motion. After these steps, the remaining variants form 𝑉 .

## 3.2 Assessing Test Adequacy via Program Variants 

STING assesses the adequacy of 𝑇 by executing each program vari-ant 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 against the full regression test suite and identifying those that pass. A variant that passes all tests in 𝑇 but violates the in-tended behavior of 𝑃 𝑔𝑡 is a surviving variant , indicating that 𝑇 could not distinguish it from the reference patch. Algorithm 1 describes this procedure. For each variant 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 ,

STING executes 𝑇 and records the result (Lines 2–3). Executions that fail due to environment errors or timeouts are discarded (Lines 4–6), as they are not attributable to program logic. Variants that fail at least one test are excluded, since their behavioral deviation is al-ready detected by 𝑇 . Finally, variants that pass all tests are collected into the surviving variant set 𝑉 𝑠 (Lines 7–9). 

𝑉 𝑠 highlights the potential behavioral gaps in 𝑇 , which are the program behavior that the existing tests fail to constrain. STING 

uses these surviving variants as diagnostic signals to guide targeted test generation in the next stage. 

## 3.3 Program Variant-Guided Test Generation 

STING generate additional test cases to address the behavioral gaps revealed by 𝑉 𝑠 . STING uses surviving program variants as guidance: each variant identifies a concrete behavioral difference that 𝑇 fails to detect, providing a target for test generation. 

STING employs an LLM-based test generator that takes as input 

𝑃 𝑔𝑡 , a surviving variant 𝑣 𝑠 , the existing tests 𝑇 , and project test file snippets for style alignment. We adopt a contrastive reasoning 

strategy [ 9], implemented through a structured prompt (Figure 4). The test generator first analyzes how 𝑣 𝑠 deviates from the intended behavior of 𝑃 𝑔𝑡 , then identifies scenarios where existing tests fail to distinguish them, and finally produces targeted regression tests for those scenarios. To reduce the risk that generated tests depend on implementa-tion artifacts rather than behavioral differences, STING restricts all generated tests to interact only through the program’s public methods. This design choice encourages generated tests to validate externally observable behavior instead of superficial implementa-tion details. By targeting such inputs or execution conditions, the generated tests are more likely to reveal behaviors that are not sufficiently constrained by the current test suite. To ensure the generated tests are meaningful and consistent with the intended behavior, we enforce the following two principles: Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY Trovato et al. ## Task : Generate a modified patch variant that introduces a semantic                                                                            

> deviation from the reference implementation while remaining syntactically
> valid and interface -compatible, and still likely to pass the existing
> regression tests .
> ## Inputs :[ Issue description] [Reference patch 𝑃 𝑔 𝑡 ][surviving variant vs]
> [Existing developer tests 𝑇 ][Project test file snippets (for style alignment)]
> ## Constraints
> • Generated tests must interact through public APIs only
> • Must follow the repository's testing framework and style
> • Must not depend on implementation details (variable names ,internal
> state, expression forms )
> • Must not duplicate existing tests
> • Must PASS on the gold implementation
> ## Contrastive Analysis Process:
> •Analyze the intended behavior enforced by the gold patch 𝑃 𝑔 𝑡
> •Identify how the surviving variant vsdeviates from 𝑃 𝑔 𝑡
> • Assess whether the deviation violates the intended semantics described
> in the issue, or represents avalid alternative implementation
> • For deviations that violate intended behavior, determine which are NOT
> detected by existing tests T, and why
> •Design test inputs that trigger divergent observable outcomes between
> 𝑃 𝑔 𝑡 and the variant
> ## Output :
> •Behavioral analysis of 𝑃 𝑔 𝑡 vs. vs
> •Test plan explaining new scenarios and rationale
> •Generated test code

Figure 4: Simplified prompt template used in targeted test generation. 

(1) Behavioral Differentiation. Each generated test must produce different observable outcomes when executed on 𝑃 𝑔𝑡 and at least one surviving variant in 𝑉 𝑠 , thereby exposing semantic discrepancies. 

(2) Intent Alignment. 𝑃 𝑔𝑡 serves as the authoritative oracle: a gener-ated test is accepted only if it passes on 𝑃 𝑔𝑡 , ensuring consistency with the intended behavior of the fix. Because a single 𝑣 𝑠 may expose multiple behavioral differences from 𝑃 𝑔𝑡 , STING allows the LLM to produce multiple test cases per contrastive query, each targeting a different aspect of the deviation. Finally, STING produces a candidate test set 𝑇 𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒 that targets behavioral regions previously overlooked by 𝑇 .

## 3.4 Test Validation and Selection 

Before incorporating any candidate test into the augmented suite, 

STING validates it against three criteria. This validation is designed to ensure that retained tests are consistent with the intended be-havior of 𝑃 𝑔𝑡 , add genuinely new behavioral constraints, and do not overfit superficial implementation details. Each test must therefore satisfy three criteria: 

Correctness. A generated test must pass on 𝑃 𝑔𝑡 , ensuring consis-tency with the intended behavior of the fix. Tests that fail on 𝑃 𝑔𝑡 

are discarded. 

Effectiveness. STING retains a test only if it exposes new behav-ioral discrepancies. It executes each candidate test on the surviving variants 𝑉 𝑠 and keeps the test only if it fails on at least one variant, indicating that it constrains behavior not covered by 𝑇 .

Robustness to Test Overfitting. Prior studies have shown that LLM-generated code can be sensitive to superficial features of the input context, such as identifier names and code structure [ 15 , 41 ]. In the test generation setting, this means generated tests may in-advertently encode implementation-specific properties, such as specific variable names or control-flow patterns, rather than ob-servable program behavior. As a result, they may incorrectly reject semantically equivalent implementations. To detect such overfitting tests, STING applies behavior-preserving transformations to 𝑃 𝑔𝑡 ,including identifier renaming, operand swapping, and control-flow restructuring (Table 2). Because these transformations preserve se-mantics, a valid test should pass on all transformed variants. Tests that fail on any such variant are discarded, as they likely depend on superficial artifacts rather than program behavior. In addition to transformation-based filtering, STING uses an LLM-based screening step that classifies each retained test as either a valid behavioral strengthening or an implementation-specific check tied to the ora-cle patch. Tests classified as implementation-specific are discarded. 

Table 2: Behavior-preserving transformations used in robust-ness validation [20]. 

Transform Description 

Replace names Consistently renames functions, classes, vari-ables, parameters, etc. while preserving scope. Swap operands Swaps the operands of simple binary compar-isons, e.g. a < b → b > a , x == y → y == x.Reorder statements (*) Reorders independent local statements that have no data dependencies. Split if-conditions Splits compound conditions into nested if-statements while preserving short-circuit se-mantics. Combine if-statements Merges consecutive if-statements into a sin-gle compound condition, preserving evalua-tion order. ConExpr ↔ If-else Converts ternary conditional expressions into multi-line if-else blocks and vice versa. For ↔ While (*) Transforms for-loops into equivalent while-loops and vice versa. Arithmetic transform Converts augmented assignments to ex-panded form and vice versa, e.g. x += 1 ↔ x= x + 1 .ListComp ↔ ForLoop (*) Rewrites list comprehensions into equivalent explicit for-loops and vice versa. Boolean simplify (*) Simplifies boolean expressions, e.g. x is True → x, not (x > y) → x <= y .FString ↔ Format Converts f-strings into equivalent .format() 

calls and vice versa. 

## 4 Evaluation 

In this section, we evaluate STING by answering four research questions (RQs). 

Benchmark. We conduct our evaluation on SWE-bench Verified [ 5], a curated benchmark of 500 real-world software issues collected from widely used open-source Python repositories. We select this benchmark for two reasons. First, its evaluation relies entirely on Are Benchmark Tests Strong Enough? Mutation-Guided Diagnosis and Augmentation of Regression Suites Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY 

the provided regression tests 𝑇 . The strength of 𝑇 directly deter-mines whether benchmark results faithfully reflect patch correct-ness, making test adequacy a first-class concern. Second, its official evaluation harness executes tests in isolated Docker environments, enabling reproducible experimentation at scale. 

Implementation. All LLM-based components (variant generation and test synthesis) use GPT-5-mini ( gpt-5-mini-2025-08-07 , rea-soning level: medium), chosen for its balance of code reasoning ability and cost at scale. For operator-based mutation, all 32 opera-tors are applied to compatible sites within the patch region, with each operator executed for 10 attempts using randomly sampled transformation sites. For LLM-based mutation, 10 independent vari-ants are generated per instance; duplicate responses are discarded and re-queried. 

## RQ1: What behavioral gaps exist in SWE-bench regression tests? 

Motivation. Regression test suites may fail to fully constrain the intended behavior of a fix: a program variant can pass all tests while still violating the intended semantics of the reference patch. Such cases indicate that the benchmark silently accepts incorrect implementations. In this RQ, we study how often this occurs and which behavioral gaps enable such variants to survive, which is critical for assessing the reliability of existing benchmarks. 

Approach. We apply both operator-based and LLM-based mutation (§3.1) to all 500 instances in SWE-bench Verified. For each instance, we execute the existing regression tests 𝑇 against each generated variant and collect the surviving variant set 𝑉 𝑠 .First, to measure how often test suites fail to fully constrain program behavior in SWE-bench Verified, we count the number of program variants that survive the existing tests. Specifically, we report the number of surviving variants and the number of affected issues for each variant generation method, including operator-based mutation, LLM-based mutation, and their combination after dedu-plication. Second, to understand why program variants survive , we an-alyze the types of behavioral gaps that allow them to pass existing tests. We first examine the distribution of surviving operator-based variants across mutation categories (Table 4) to identify which mu-tations are most likely to evade detection. For LLM-based surviving variants, whose changes are not constrained to predefined oper-ators, we instead classify each surviving variant by its top-level modified AST node type following the previous method [ 31 ] (Ta-ble 5), to characterize the structural nature of changes that evade existing tests. We then conduct a qualitative analysis on a random 20% sample of instances with surviving variants, following prior mutation-testing studies [ 36 ]. For each instance, two authors inde-pendently examine representative surviving variants, the reference patch, and the corresponding tests, and categorize the underlying behavioral gap. Disagreements are resolved through discussion, and we report Cohen’s 𝜅 to assess inter-rater agreement. 

Results and Discussions. 77% of SWE-bench Verified instances have at least one surviving program variant that passes all existing regression tests. Table 3 reports the number of surviving program variants and affected instances for each mutation strategy. 385 of 500 instances (77.0%) contain at least one surviving program 

Table 3: Surviving program variants and affected instances by the two mutation strategies on SWE-bench Verified (500 instances total).         

> Operator-based LLM-based Affected SWE-bench instances 50 / 500 (10.0%) 380 / 500 (76.0%) Surviving program variants 209 1,915 Avg. variants per instance 4.2 5.0 Combined unique instances 385 / 500 (77.0%)

Table 4: Surviving variants not killed by developer-written tests, grouped by semantic category with their contributing operators.                          

> Semantic Category Operator # Surviving Predicate & Boolean Logic (52.2%) condfalse 55 condtrue 16 eqflip 13 boollit 9cmpbound 7condflip 5boolswap 4Arithmetic & Numeric (32.1%) len2zero 17 numlit 14 strlit 14 len2one 13 arithop 6none2zero 3Loop & Iteration (6.7%) reverseloop 11 brkcont 3Exception Handling (4.3%) exctype 9Return & Default (3.3%) retNone 7Structural Transfromations (1.4%) decdel 3
> Total 209

variant, showing that under-constrained tests are widespread in the benchmark rather than limited to a few edge cases. LLM-based mutation accounts for the majority, affecting 380 instances with 1,915 variants. Meanwhile, operator-based mutation affects 50 in-stances with 209 variants, of which 5 are not covered by LLM-based variants. LLM-based mutation also produces more variants per af-fected instance (5.0 vs 4.2), suggesting that it explores a broader space of behavioral deviation per issue. 

Conditional logic is the dominant source of surviving pro-gram variants in both strategies (52.2% operator-based, 54.3% LLM-based). Table 4 breaks down the 209 surviving operator-based variants by mutation category. Predicate and Boolean Logic muta-tions are the most common types of operators, accounting for 109 of 209 variants (52.2%), with condfalse alone contributing 55. The finding indicates that many conditional branches in patch regions are not exercised by any test input. Arithmetic and Numeric muta-tions follow at 67 variants (32.1%). Together, these two categories account for over 84% of all surviving variants. The remaining cate-gories contribute 33 variants combined (15.7%). Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY Trovato et al. 

Table 5: Change patterns in LLM-based surviving variants, classified by the top-level modified AST node following prior taxonomy of bug fix patterns [31].                    

> Change Pattern AST Node Types # Surviving
> Condition Modification (54.3%) If, Compare 1,040 Function Modification (16.9%) FunctionDef, ClassDef 324 Assignment Modification (11.9%) Assign, AugAssign 228 Return Modification (6.9%) Return 132 Expression/Call Modification (4.0%) Call, Expr 77 Loop Modification (2.8%) For, While 53 Exception Handling Modification (1.7%) Try, Raise 33 Other (1.5%) –28
> Total 1,915

Table 5 shows LLM-based surviving variants by classifying each change according to the top-level modified AST node type, follow-ing prior taxonomy of bug fix patterns [ 31 ]. Condition Modification 

is the most frequent pattern (54.3%), consistent with the dominance of conditional mutations observed in operator-based variants. The results indicate that test suites often fail to constrain branch be-havior. Moreover, LLM-based mutations introduce more complex changes, including Function Modification (16.9%) and Assignment Modification (11.9%), which typically span several statements or broader code regions. These patterns are difficult to capture with first-order mutants, suggesting that LLM-based mutations can ex-pose higher-level behavioral gaps beyond localized changes. Based on the manual analysis result by two authors (Cohen’s 

𝑘 = 0.94 ), we identify four recurring patterns in how existing tests fail to constrain surviving variants . Insufficient Input Space Ex-ploration is the most common (55.8%), and Missing Environmental Context is the least (7.8%). We discuss each pattern in detail below: 

Pattern 1: Insufficient Input Space Exploration (43, 55.8%). 

Tests check only a small set of inputs and miss other valid cases, such as boundary values or alternative configurations. For example, in django-11239 , the fix ensures that each SSL parameter is passed correctly to the subprocess. However, the test checks only one configuration, sslmode=verify-ca , and does not cover other SSL settings. This is the most common pattern, showing that many tests verify only a few representative inputs. 

Pattern 2: Partial Patch Path Coverage (15, 19.5%). Tests cover the primary execution path but skip alternative paths that the patch also modifies, such as fallback logic or default implementations. For example, in django-11095 , the fix supports both a custom 

get_inlines() implementation and the default behavior when no custom implementation is provided. The test checks only the custom case and does not cover the default one. This pattern is common when a fix changes both the default behavior and an overridden behavior, but the test exercises only one path. 

Pattern 3: Weak Assertions (13, 16.9%). Tests verify only the visible output and miss deeper properties of the expected behavior, such as type, metadata, or structure. For example, in django-9296 ,the fix ensures that iterating over Paginator yields Page objects rather than raw lists. However, the test only converts the result to a list and checks its contents, so it cannot detect whether the returned values are actually Page objects. This results in three incorrect variants that return raw data still pass. This pattern allows a patch Lines Branch 

0

10 

20 

30 

40 

50 

60 

> Coverage (%)

40.8 41.7 

51.6 51.2 

Original Original + Generated 

Figure 5: Coverage comparison between original and aug-mented test suites. 

to satisfy the test at the output level while violating the interface that downstream code relies on. 

Pattern 4: Missing Environmental Context (6, 7.8%). Tests exe-cute in a clean setup and fail to capture behaviors that depend on ex-isting environment context. For example, in django-10973 , the test uses a mocked subprocess with no pre-existing PGPASSWORD and al-ways assumes success. A surviving variant fails when PGPASSWORD 

is already present and also skips error checking, but the test fails to detect issues in both variants. Although this is the least common pattern, it is particularly risky in practice because the patch may pass in CI yet fail silently in production. Under-constrained tests are widespread: 77% of instances admit at least one incorrect variant that still passes all tests. Most gaps come from insufficient input space exploration (55.8%) and missing execution paths (19.5%). Overall, tests tend to validate the immediate fix rather than the full behavior it affects. 

## RQ2: How do the augmented tests improve the coverage of the regression test suite? 

Motivation. RQ1 shows that many SWE-bench Verified instances remain under-constrained: program variants can still pass the orig-inal regression suite. We therefore investigate whether the aug-mented tests generated by STING improve coverage of the fix-relevant behavior that the original suite fails to exercise. 

Approach. We compare the original test suite 𝑇 with the aug-mented suite 𝑇 ′ = 𝑇 ∪ 𝑇 𝑛𝑒𝑤 , where 𝑇 𝑛𝑒𝑤 contains validated gener-ated tests. Our evaluation focuses on whether 𝑇 ′ better constrains the fix-relevant behavior that allowed variants to survive under 𝑇 .We measure this along two complementary dimensions: (1) struc-tural coverage and (2) assertion strength. For structural coverage, we report line coverage and branch coverage over the patch region, computed as the percentage of executed lines and branches within the modified code. These metrics quantify whether the augmented Are Benchmark Tests Strong Enough? Mutation-Guided Diagnosis and Augmentation of Regression Suites Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY 

Table 6: Per-issue static characteristics of developer-written tests versus generated tests.             

> Metric Original Generated Delta
> Assertion Number 2.31 5.18 +124.2% Assertion Density 0.22 0.30 +36.4% Assertion Types 1.56 3.14 +101.2%

suite exercises additional execution paths introduced or affected by the fix [29]. For assertion strength, we report three metrics: (i) assertions per test, defined as the average number of assertion statements in each test suite; (ii) assertion density, defined as the ratio of assertion statements to total statements within a test suite, capturing how much of the test is devoted to behavioral checking rather than setup or execution; and (iii) assertion type diversity, defined as the number of distinct assertion types used (e.g., equality, exception, membership), reflecting the variety of behavioral properties being validated. Together, these metrics characterize how thoroughly the tests check the executed behavior, beyond simply increasing coverage [ 7 , 49 ]. We further use paired Wilcoxon signed-rank tests and rank-biserial correlation to assess statistical significance and effect size across issues. 

Results and Discussions. STING generates 1,316 candidate test cases across 236 test-weak instances. After removing tests that de-pend on implementation-specific behavior ( Robustness validation inSection 3.4), 1,014 tests across 211 instances are retained for aug-mentation. For each issue, we compare these retained tests with the developer-written test suite, including both newly added tests and modifications to existing ones. The augmented test suites sub-stantially expand coverage over the patch region (i.e., fix-relevant code). As shown in Figure 5, across the 211 instances, average line coverage increases from 40.8% to 51.6%, and branch coverage from 41.7% to 51.2%. The improvements are statistically significant under paired Wilcoxon signed-rank tests ( 𝑝 < 0.001 and 𝑝 ≈ 0.02 , re-spectively), and all non-zero paired differences favor augmentation. This indicates that the generated tests exercise previously untested execution paths. More importantly, the improvement is not limited to executing more code. The generated tests also strengthen behavioral con-straints through richer assertions. Prior work has shown that a richer assertion structure is associated with stronger fault-detection capability [ 7 , 49 ]. To characterize the checking strength contributed by the generated tests themselves, we further compare their asser-tion structure with that of the developer-written tests. As shown in Table 6, they contain more than twice as many assertions per test suite (5.18 vs. 2.31), higher assertion density (0.30 vs. 0.22), and greater assertion type diversity (3.14 vs. 1.56 unique types). These differences are statistically significant under paired Wilcoxon signed-rank tests (all p < 0.001), with medium-to-large effect sizes 

𝑟 𝑟𝑏 = 0.55 , 0.48 and 0.52 , respectively. Together, these results indi-cate that the additional coverage is accompanied by richer behav-ioral checks, rather than superficial execution alone. 

STING improves coverage of under-constrained regression suites by targeting fix-relevant code paths missed by developer-written tests. The augmented suite increases patch-region line coverage by 10.8% and branch coverage by 9.5%, while also providing richer assertions over the covered code paths. 

## RQ3: How does stronger testing change repair agent evaluation? 

Motivation. RQ1 and RQ2 show that STING exposes test gaps and generates targeted tests that improve coverage. In this RQ, we examine how these stronger tests affect the evaluation of repair agents. Specifically, we re-run patches produced by these agents on the augmented test suite to determine whether incorrect patches that previously passed are now detected. 

Approach. We re-evaluate the top-10 repair agents on the SWE-bench Verified leaderboard [ 4] whose submitted patches are publicly available. For each agent-generated patch, we execute both the original tests 𝑇 and the augmented suite 𝑇 ′ = 𝑇 ∪ 𝑇 𝑛𝑒𝑤 produced by STING . A patch is counted as killed if it originally passed 𝑇 

but fails at least one test in 𝑇 𝑛𝑒𝑤 . We then compute each agent’s resolved rate under 𝑇 ′ and compare it against the original rate. To understand the contribution of each mutation strategy, we further report kills separately for tests derived from the operator-based mutation pipeline ( 𝑇 ′ 

> 𝑜𝑝

) and the LLM-based mutation pipeline ( 𝑇 ′ 

> 𝑙𝑙𝑚

). 

Results. Table 7 shows that the augmented tests consistently change evaluation outcomes for all ten repair agents. Resolved-rate drops range from 4.2% to 9.0%, with 21 to 45 previously accepted patches per agent now rejected. The two mutation strategies are comple-mentary: LLM-based tests account for most of the detected failures, while operator-based tests contribute an additional 3 to 6 unique failures per agent that LLM-based tests do not catch. These correc-tions also change the leaderboard. Atlassian Rovo Dev , ACoder , and 

TRAE drop in rank, while EPAM AI , Warp , and Harness AI move up. This change indicates that the original test suites accepted a non-trivial number of incorrect patches, inflating the reported per-formance of some agents. Overall, the results show that stronger tests provide a more reliable comparison between repair agents. 

Findings: STING ’s augmented tests reduce resolved rates by 4.2% to 9.0% across all 10 agents, with some repair agents experiencing larger drops. 

## RQ4: What behavioral checks do the augmented tests introduce? 

Motivation. RQ3 shows that the augmented tests reject many previously accepted patches. To understand what makes these tests effective, we analyze the behavioral checks they add and how each exposes flaws missed by original tests. 

Approach. We randomly sample 66 (20%) newly rejected patches in RQ3 for manual analysis. For each sample, we examine the origi-nal tests, the oracle patch, and the augmented tests that cause the rejection to understand why the patch fails. By comparing the as-sertions, inputs, and execution paths introduced by the augmented Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY Trovato et al. 

Table 7: Impact of augmented tests on repair agent evaluation. A patch is counted as killed if it originally passed 𝑇 but fails at least one test in 𝑇 𝑛𝑒𝑤 . Δ denotes the change in resolved rate.                                                                     

> Repair Agents Resolved% Orig. →Post. ( Δ)Killed Killed by 𝑇 ′
> 𝑜𝑝 Killed by 𝑇 ′
> 𝑙𝑙𝑚 Adjusted Rank
> live-SWE-agent (Claude 4.5 Opus medium) [43] 79.20% →75.00% (- 4.20%) 21 320 1st Sonar Foundation Agent (Claude 4.5 Opus) [35] 79.20% →75.00% (- 4.20%) 21 321 1st Trae Doubao Seed Code [14] 78.80% →71.40% (- 6.40%) 32 531 3rd live-SWE-agent (Gemini 3 Pro Preview) [43] 77.40% →71.40% (- 6.00%) 30 330 4th Atlassian Rovo Dev [11] 76.80% →68.80% (- 8.00%) 40 539 8th ↓
> EPAM AI (Claude 4 Sonnet) [12] 76.80% →69.40% (- 7.40%) 37 435 5th ↑
> ACoder [1] 76.40% →69.00% (- 7.40%) 37 535 7th Warp [42] 75.60% →69.40% (- 6.20%) 31 430 5th ↑
> TRAE [14] 75.20% →66.20% (- 9.00%) 45 643 10th ↓
> Harness AI [18] 74.80% →67.80% (- 7.00%) 35 533 9th ↑
> Total. –329 38 317 –

tests against those in the original suite, we identify the behavioral property that the augmented tests newly constrain. Two authors in-dependently analyze the sampled patches. The first author develops an initial set of categories by open-coding all samples, identifying recurring types of behavioral checks that the augmented tests intro-duce. The second author then independently assigns each sample to one of the proposed categories. Disagreements are resolved through discussion, after which the category definitions are finalized. We re-port Cohen’s 𝜅 on the independent assignments to assess inter-rater agreement. Both authors also assess whether each rejection reflects genuine semantic incompleteness or overfitting to the oracle patch. 

Results. After manual inspection, we find that all agent-generated patches killed by our generated tests are indeed invalid. We fur-ther identify three common types 1 of behavioral checks in the aug-mented tests that expose gaps in agent-generated patches, achieving Cohen’s 𝜅 = 0.92 .

Input Selection for Behavioral Differentiation (36, 54.5%). 

The augmented tests introduce inputs that differentiate correct be-havior from plausible approximations. For example, in django-14017 ,the original tests confirm that valid expression types are accepted but do not check that invalid types are rejected. The augmented tests add cases with values that evaluate to True but should be re-jected, covering both acceptance and rejection behavior. As another example, in scikit-learn-14496 , the original inputs produce iden-tical results under both truncation and rounding. The augmented tests introduce values for which the two operations yield different outputs, making the behavioral difference observable. 

End-to-End Behavioral Validation (27, 40.9%). The augmented tests extend validation from partial and local checks to end-to-end behavior across dependent code paths. For example, in django-11276 ,the original tests check only that escape() produces the updated entity format. The augmented tests instead assert on the final URL output after the data flows through both escape() and urlize() ,catching patches that fix the local function but leave downstream behavior incorrect. 

> 1Detailed examples for all three patterns are available in our replication package under artifact_packages/result/analysis/rq4-behavioral-checks

State Transition Validation (3, 4.6%). The augmented tests verify that the fix holds after state transitions, not just in the ini-tial object state. For example, in django-12965 , the original tests validate a deletion optimization only on a freshly created queryset. The augmented tests first evaluate the queryset and then perform the deletion, exposing patches that work on fresh objects but fail after prior state changes. The augmented tests expose flaws in previously accepted agent-generated patches through three types of behavioral checks: in-put selection for behavioral differentiation (54.5%), end-to-end behavioral validation (40.9%), and state transition validation (4.6%). These checks generalize across agents while introducing minimal overfitting to the oracle patch. 

## 5 Threats to Validity 

We discuss the main threats to internal, external, and construct validity below. 

Internal Validity. Some surviving variants may be semantically equivalent to the oracle patch, which would overstate the preva-lence of test gaps. We mitigate this through AST-level normalization, deduplication, and a validation stage that filters generated tests which fail to generalize across behavior-preserving variants. Resid-ual equivalent variants may remain, but they would primarily make our test-weakness analysis more conservative. Generated tests may overfit implementation details of the oracle patch. We address this via behavior-preserving transformations that discard tests sensitive to superficial artifacts, removing 23% of candidate tests. Our RQ4 analysis finds only one ambiguous rejec-tion across all affected instances, indicating that residual overfitting risk is low. The manual classifications in RQ1 and RQ4 involve subjective judgment. Two authors independently labeled all cases (Cohen’s 

𝜅 = 0.94 and 0.92) and resolved disagreements by consensus. 

External Validity. Our evaluation is conducted on SWE-bench Verified (500 Python instances from 12 repositories) so our results may not generalize to other languages, benchmarks, or proprietary Are Benchmark Tests Strong Enough? Mutation-Guided Diagnosis and Augmentation of Regression Suites Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY 

codebases. However, our approach is not inherently tied to SWE-bench Verified: it applies to any benchmark providing an oracle patch and executable tests. The mutation operators and validation pipeline are instantiated for Python, but extending them to other languages is feasible given the availability of mature mutation testing tools. We evaluate patches from the top-10 leaderboard tools, covering both agent-based and LLM-based strategies, though this does not exhaust all repair approaches. 

Construct Validity. STING uses the oracle patch as its primary correctness reference. If the oracle patch is not the only acceptable implementation, augmented tests may reject valid alternatives; our RQ4 analysis finds only one such case. We assess test quality using coverage and assertion characteristics, complemented by variant kill rate and downstream patch-assessment results. All LLM-based components use a single model (GPT-5-mini); results may vary under different models or settings. 

## 6 Conclusion 

This paper presented STING , a test augmentation framework that systematically diagnoses and repairs behavioral weaknesses in benchmark regression test suites. STING generates semantically modified variants of the oracle patch, uses surviving variants as diagnostic signals of under-constrained behavior, and synthesizes targeted tests that make the missing constraints explicit. Our eval-uation on SWE-bench Verified shows that test weakness is wide-spread: 77% of instances admit at least one surviving variant. Guided by these variants, STING generates 1,014 validated tests across 211 instances, increases patch-region line and branch coverage by 10.8% and 9.5%, and adds richer behavioral checks than the original developer-written tests. When used to re-evaluate the top-10 repair agents, the augmented suites reduce resolved rates by 4.2%–9.0%, showing that many previously accepted patches exploit benchmark test gaps rather than fully satisfying the intended repair semantics. These results suggest that benchmark evaluation is not solely a solution-generation problem but also a test-strength problem. By turning implicit test gaps into explicit behavioral checks, STING 

provides a practical path toward more reliable benchmark-based assessment in automated software engineering. 

## References 

[1] ACoder-AI. 2025. ACoder. https://github.com/ACoder-AI/ACoder Accessed: Jan. 12, 2026. [2] Reem Aleithan, Haoran Xue, Mohammad Mahdi Mohajer, Elijah Nnorom, Gias Uddin, and Song Wang. 2024. Swe-bench+: Enhanced coding benchmark for llms. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.06992 (2024). [3] Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Dohan, Ellen Jiang, Carrie Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le, et al . 2021. Program synthesis with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07732 (2021). [4] SWE bench Team. 2025. SWE-bench Verified Leaderboard. https://www. swebench.com/index.html Accessed: Jan. 12, 2026. [5] Introducing SWE bench Verified. August 13, 2024. https://openai.com/index/ introducing-swe-bench-verified/ Accessed Jan. 1, 2026. [6] Austin Bingham and Robert Smallshire. 2016. Cosmic Ray: Mutation Testing for Python. https://github.com/sixty-north/cosmic-ray. Accessed: 2026-02-01. [7] Gemma Catolino, Fabio Palomba, Andy Zaidman, and Filomena Ferrucci. 2019. How the experience of development teams relates to assertion density of test classes. In 2019 IEEE International Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolu-tion (ICSME) . IEEE, 223–234. [8] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde De Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al . 2021. Evaluating large language models trained on code. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374 (2021). [9] Yew Ken Chia, Guizhen Chen, Luu Anh Tuan, Soujanya Poria, and Lidong Bing. 2023. Contrastive chain-of-thought prompting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.09277 

(2023). [10] Renzo Degiovanni and Mike Papadakis. 2022. μBert: Mutation Testing using Pre-Trained Language Models. In 2022 IEEE International Conference on Software Testing, Verification and Validation Workshops (ICSTW) . 160–169. doi:10.1109/ ICSTW55395.2022.00039 [11] Rovo Dev. 2025. Atlassian Rovo Dev. https://www.atlassian.com/software/rovo-dev Accessed: Jan. 12, 2026. [12] epam. 2025. EPAM AI. https://www.epam.com/services/artificial-intelligence Accessed: Jan. 12, 2026. [13] Gordon Fraser and Andrea Arcuri. 2011. Evosuite: automatic test suite generation for object-oriented software. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM SIGSOFT symposium and the 13th European conference on Foundations of software engineering . 416–419. [14] Pengfei Gao, Zhao Tian, Xiangxin Meng, Xinchen Wang, Ruida Hu, Yuanan Xiao, Yizhou Liu, Zhao Zhang, Junjie Chen, Cuiyun Gao, et al . 2025. Trae agent: An llm-based agent for software engineering with test-time scaling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.23370 (2025). [15] Shuzheng Gao, Cuiyun Gao, Chaozheng Wang, Jun Sun, David Lo, and Yue Yu. 2023. Two sides of the same coin: Exploiting the impact of identifiers in neural code comprehension. In 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) . IEEE, 1933–1945. [16] Lucca Renato Guerino, Pedro Henrique Kuroishi, Ana Cristina Ramada Paiva, and Auri Marcelo Rizzo Vincenzi. 2024. Static and Dynamic Comparison of Mutation Testing Tools for Python. In Proceedings of the XXIII Brazilian Symposium on Software Quality . 199–209. [17] Mark Harman, Jillian Ritchey, Inna Harper, Shubho Sengupta, Ke Mao, Abhishek Gulati, Christopher Foster, and Hervé Robert. 2025. Mutation-guided llm-based test generation at meta. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on the Foundations of Software Engineering . 180–191. [18] harness. 2025. Harness AI. https://www.harness.io/ Accessed: Jan. 12, 2026. [19] Konrad Hałas. 2014. MutPy: Mutation Testing Tool for Python. https://github. com/mutpy/mutpy. Accessed: 2026-02-01. [20] Max Hort, Linas Vidziunas, and Leon Moonen. 2025. Semantic-preserving trans-formations as mutation operators: A study on their effectiveness in defect detec-tion. In 2025 IEEE International Conference on Software Testing, Verification and Validation Workshops (ICSTW) . IEEE, 337–346. [21] Anders Hovmöller. 2018. mutmut: Mutation Testing System for Python. https: //github.com/boxed/mutmut. Accessed: 2026-02-01. [22] Gunel Jahangirova, David Clark, Mark Harman, and Paolo Tonella. 2016. Test oracle assessment and improvement. In Proceedings of the 25th international symposium on software testing and analysis . 247–258. [23] Yue Jia and Mark Harman. 2010. An analysis and survey of the development of mutation testing. IEEE transactions on software engineering 37, 5 (2010), 649–678. [24] Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2023. Swe-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues? arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06770 (2023). [25] William B Langdon, Mark Harman, and Yue Jia. 2010. Efficient multi-objective higher order mutation testing with genetic programming. Journal of systems and Software 83, 12 (2010), 2416–2430. [26] Caroline Lemieux, Jeevana Priya Inala, Shuvendu K Lahiri, and Siddhartha Sen. 2023. Codamosa: Escaping coverage plateaus in test generation with pre-trained large language models. In 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on Soft-ware Engineering (ICSE) . IEEE, 919–931. [27] Jiawei Liu, Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yuyao Wang, and Lingming Zhang. 2023. Is your code generated by chatgpt really correct? rigorous evaluation of large language models for code generation. Advances in neural information processing systems 

36 (2023), 21558–21572. [28] Stephan Lukasczyk and Gordon Fraser. 2022. Pynguin: Automated unit test gen-eration for python. In Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE 44th International Conference on Software Engineering: Companion Proceedings . 168–172. [29] Akbar Siami Namin and James H Andrews. 2009. The influence of size and coverage on test suite effectiveness. In Proceedings of the eighteenth international symposium on Software testing and analysis . 57–68. [30] Milos Ojdanic, Ezekiel Soremekun, Renzo Degiovanni, Mike Papadakis, and Yves Le Traon. 2023. Mutation testing in evolving systems: Studying the relevance of mutants to code evolution. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology 32, 1 (2023), 1–39. [31] Kai Pan, Sunghun Kim, and E James Whitehead Jr. 2009. Toward an understanding of bug fix patterns. Empirical Software Engineering 14, 3 (2009), 286–315. [32] Django project. 2019. Issue report: Django__django-11276. https://www. swebench.com/index.html Accessed: Jan. 18, 2026. [33] Zichao Qi, Fan Long, Sara Achour, and Martin Rinard. 2015. An analysis of patch plausibility and correctness for generate-and-validate patch generation systems. In Proceedings of the 2015 international symposium on software testing and analysis .24–36. Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY Trovato et al. 

[34] Edward K Smith, Earl T Barr, Claire Le Goues, and Yuriy Brun. 2015. Is the cure worse than the disease? overfitting in automated program repair. In Proceedings of the 2015 10th joint meeting on foundations of software engineering . 532–543. [35] Sonar. 2025. Sonar Foundation Agent. https://www.sonarsource.com/ Accessed: Jan. 12, 2026. [36] Philipp Straubinger, Alexander Degenhart, and Gordon Fraser. 2024. An Empirical Evaluation of Manually Created Equivalent Mutants. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Software Testing, Verification and Validation Workshops (ICSTW) .IEEE, 237–246. [37] Shin Hwei Tan, Hiroaki Yoshida, Mukul R Prasad, and Abhik Roychoudhury. 2016. Anti-patterns in search-based program repair. In Proceedings of the 2016 24th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Foundations of Software Engineering .727–738. [38] Zhao Tian, Honglin Shu, Dong Wang, Xuejie Cao, Yasutaka Kamei, and Junjie Chen. 2024. Large language models for equivalent mutant detection: How far are we?. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis . 1733–1745. [39] Frank Tip, Jonathan Bell, and Max Schäfer. 2025. Llmorpheus: Mutation testing using large language models. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering (2025). [40] You Wang, Michael Pradel, and Zhongxin Liu. 2025. Are" solved issues" in swe-bench really solved correctly? an empirical study. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.15223 

(2025). [41] Zhilong Wang, Lan Zhang, Chen Cao, Nanqing Luo, Xinzhi Luo, and Peng Liu. 2023. How Does Naming Affect LLMs on Code Analysis Tasks? arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.12488 (2023). [42] Warp-dev. 2025. Warp. https://www.warp.dev/ Accessed: Jan. 12, 2026. [43] Chunqiu Steven Xia, Zhe Wang, Yan Yang, Yuxiang Wei, and Lingming Zhang. 2025. Live-SWE-agent: Can Software Engineering Agents Self-Evolve on the Fly? 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.13646 (2025). [44] Tao Xie. 2006. Augmenting automatically generated unit-test suites with re-gression oracle checking. In European conference on object-oriented programming .Springer, 380–403. [45] Qi Xin and Steven P. Reiss. 2017. Identifying test-suite-overfitted patches through test case generation. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis (Santa Barbara, CA, USA) (ISSTA 2017) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 226–236. doi:10.1145/3092703.3092718 [46] Jinqiu Yang, Alexey Zhikhartsev, Yuefei Liu, and Lin Tan. 2017. Better test cases for better automated program repair. In Proceedings of the 2017 11th Joint Meeting on Foundations of Software Engineering (Paderborn, Germany) (ESEC/FSE 2017) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 831–841. doi:10.1145/3106237.3106274 [47] Boxi Yu, Yuxuan Zhu, Pinjia He, and Daniel Kang. 2025. Utboost: Rigorous evaluation of coding agents on swe-bench. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) .3762–3774. [48] Zhiqiang Yuan, Mingwei Liu, Shiji Ding, Kaixin Wang, Yixuan Chen, Xin Peng, and Yiling Lou. 2024. Evaluating and improving chatgpt for unit test generation. 

Proceedings of the ACM on Software Engineering 1, FSE (2024), 1703–1726. [49] Yucheng Zhang and Ali Mesbah. 2015. Assertions are strongly correlated with test suite effectiveness. In Proceedings of the 2015 10th Joint Meeting on Foundations of Software Engineering . 214–224. 

Received 20 February 2007; revised 12 March 2009; accepted 5 June 2009