Title: ABTest: Behavior-Driven Testing for AI Coding Agents

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.03362v1

Published Time: Tue, 07 Apr 2026 00:07:43 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
# ABTest : Behavior-Driven Testing for AI Coding Agents 

## Wuyang Dai 

York University Toronto, Canada 

ddai2002@my.yorku.ca 

## Moses Openja 

Polytechnique Montreal Montreal, Canada 

openjamosesopm@gmail.com 

## Hung Viet Pham 

York University Toronto, Canada 

hvpham@yorku.ca 

## Gias Uddin 

York University Toronto, Canada 

guddin@yorku.ca 

## Jinqiu Yang 

Concordia University Montreal, Canada 

jinqiu.yang@concordia.ca 

## Song Wang 

York University Toronto, Canada 

wangsong@yorku.ca 

## Abstract 

AI coding agents are increasingly integrated into real-world software development workflows, yet their robustness under diverse and adversarial scenarios remains poorly understood. We present ABTest , a behavior-driven fuzzing framework that systematically tests coding agents by turning real-world failure reports into repository-grounded behavioral tests. 

ABTest (1) mines user-reported anomalies to derive reusable workflow patterns ( Interaction Patterns ) and behaviors ( Ac-tion types ); (2) composes them into stepwise fuzzing tem-plates; (3) instantiates executable test cases in real reposito-ries; (4) executes them with coding agents while recording traces and artifacts; and (5) detects and validates anomalous behaviors. We apply ABTest to three widely used coding agents: Claude Code, OpenAI Codex CLI, and Gemini CLI. From 400 user-reported developer-confirmed agent failures, we extract 47 Interaction Patterns and 128 Action types , generating 647 repository-grounded fuzzing cases. Executing the 647-cases bundle once per evaluated configuration, ABTest flags 1,573 behavioral anomalies across the three coding-agent families, of which 642 are manually confirmed as new true anomalies, achieving a detection precision of 40.8%. Our results demon-strate that ABTest effectively uncovers real-world behavioral anomalies for AI coding agents. 

Keywords: AI coding agent, Behavioral testing 

ACM Reference Format: 

Wuyang Dai, Moses Openja, Hung Viet Pham, Gias Uddin, Jinqiu Yang, and Song Wang. 2024. ABTest : Behavior-Driven Testing for  

> Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
> Conference’17, Washington, DC, USA
> ©2024 ACM. ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/18/06
> https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX

AI Coding Agents. In . ACM, New York, NY, USA, 13 pages. https: //doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX 

## 1 Introduction 

Large language models (LLMs) have rapidly evolved into practical AI coding agents that assist developers with code generation, completion, refactoring, and debugging [ 5 , 11 , 19 ,21 ]. Systems such as Claude Code [ 2 ], OpenAI Codex CLI [ 3], and Gemini CLI [ 4 ] are now routinely integrated into real-world development workflows, where their outputs directly influence software correctness, security, and maintainability. Despite their growing adoption, our understanding of the robustness of these agents under realistic and adversarial coding scenarios remains limited. Existing evaluations primarily rely on static benchmarks, curated programming tasks, or human-written problem sets [ 10 ,13 , 14 , 18 ]. While effective for assessing an agent’s ability to produce functionally correct solutions, these benchmarks fo-cus on end result correctness in well-defined and controlled settings. However, they fail to capture behavioral anomalies and failure modes that emerge during real-world interactions between users and a coding agent. As a result, critical issues such as unintended side effects and deviations from user intent often remain undetected, revealing a fundamental gap between benchmark performance and practical reliability. Recent work by Zhang et al. [ 26 ] provides the first empirical study of issues reported by end users of AI coding agents, showing that such abnormal behaviors are both prevalent and impactful. For example, even when users explicitly in-struct an agent to modify a specific file, it may instead create new files or delete existing ones without authorization. These unintended action types violate developer expectations and can introduce serious risks into the development workflow. These findings suggest that correctness in completing a given task is insufficient for evaluating AI coding agents; their interactive behavior must also be systematically an-alyzed. Consequently, assessing behavioral robustness is critical for ensuring safe and trustworthy deployment in real-world software engineering. To bridge this gap, we present ABTest , a behavior-driven fuzzing framework for systematically testing AI coding agents.  

> arXiv:2604.03362v1 [cs.SE] 3 Apr 2026 Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Wuyang Dai, Moses Openja, Hung Viet Pham, Gias Uddin, Jinqiu Yang, and Song Wang

The key idea is to transform real-world, user-reported agent failures into reusable, repository-grounded test cases that expose how coding agents fail during multi-step interactions. Rather than focusing solely on final outputs, ABTest captures the full execution process, enabling the discovery of subtle behavioral deviations. Specifically, ABTest operates in five steps: (1) mines his-torical user-reported agent failures, abstracting them into reusable workflow patterns and target behaviors (i.e., Inter-action Patterns and Action Types ); (2) composes compatible pairs of these patterns and actions into structured, stepwise fuzzing seed templates; (3) instantiates each case in an iso-lated workspace mounted on a real repository; (4) executes each case with a coding agent while recording detailed ex-ecution artifacts, including prompts, command traces, file diffs, and generated outputs; and (5) applies automated ora-cles to flag suspicious behaviors, followed by manual vali-dation through inspection of execution traces and artifacts. An Interaction Pattern denotes a high-level user intent and workflow (e.g., generating output and then saving and vali-dating artifacts, repairing and re-running after a failure, or running commands and then parsing and verifying the re-sults), capturing what the user aims to achieve. An Action Type represents a concrete, tool-level operation within an interaction (e.g., applying a patch, moving a file, or invoking a command), capturing how the agent realizes the intent. We apply ABTest to three widely used AI coding agents: Claude Code, OpenAI Codex CLI, and Gemini CLI. We be-gin by mining over 400 user-reported and confirmed issues, from which we extract 47 Interaction Patterns and 128 distinct 

Action Types . Using an open-source repository as the execu-tion environment, we systematically compose compatible 

Interaction Pattern –Action pairs to construct 647 executable, repository-grounded fuzzing cases. For evaluation, we in-stantiate each case across multiple model configurations. Claude Code is evaluated with Claude 4.5 Haiku and Claude 3.5 Haiku; Codex CLI with GPT-5.1-Codex-Mini and GPT-4o-mini; and Gemini CLI with Gemini 2.5 Flash-Lite. We do not conduct a multi-model evaluation for Gemini CLI, as its automatic fallback mechanism dynamically switches models, making controlled comparisons less meaningful. Executing the 647 fuzzing cases, ABTest reported a total of 1,573 behavioral anomalies across the three coding agents, of which 642 were manually verified as true anomalies, yielding an overall behavioral anomaly detection precision of 40.8%. In detail, ABTest uncovered 119 and 87 new behavioral anom-alies in Claude Code when driven by Claude 4.5 Haiku and Claude 3.5 Haiku, respectively; 166 and 95 new anomalies in Codex CLI across its two model configurations; and 175 new anomalies in Gemini CLI with Gemini 2.5 Flash-Lite. Our results demonstrate that ABTest effectively uncovers previously unreported behavioral anomalies in AI coding agents. This paper makes the following contributions: 

• We propose ABTest , a behavior-driven fuzzing frame-work that turns real-world agent failures into reusable, repository-grounded tests for systematically evaluat-ing AI coding agents. 

• We mined more than 400 real-world user-reported is-sues and abstracted them into 47 Interaction Patterns and 128 action types. By composing these into com-patible pairs, we generate 647 executable fuzzing cases grounded in real repositories, providing a diverse and realistic evaluation workload. 

• We conduct a large-scale empirical study on Claude Code, Codex CLI, and Gemini CLI, uncovering 642 new behavioral anomalies across the three experimented AI coding agents. 

• We reveal process-level behavioral anomalies beyond functional correctness, highlighting the need for robustness-oriented evaluation of AI coding agents. 

Data Availability: We provide the data and scripts online to facilitate replication or future work at: https://anonymous. 4open.science/r/data-A421 

## 2 Background and Related Work 

2.1 AI Coding Agents 

AI coding agents extend traditional code generation by shift-ing from single-shot synthesis to iterative interaction within a persistent software workspace [ 26 ]. Rather than producing isolated snippets, these agents operate over full repositories and treat software engineering tasks as multi-step workflows, i.e., agents will iteratively inspect repository state, localize relevant components, invoke tools or commands, modify ar-tifacts, and incorporate execution feedback. Systems such as SWE-agent [ 23 ], AutoCodeRover [ 27 ], and OpenHands [ 20 ]exemplify this paradigm by integrating language models with external tools for repository navigation, code execution, and patch validation. For instance, SWE-agent introduces an agent-computer interface that enables models to browse codebases, edit files, and run tests, significantly improving performance over non-interactive approaches. Complement-ing these research systems, practitioner-oriented tools such as Claude Code [ 2 ], OpenAI Codex CLI [ 3 ], and Gemini CLI [ 4 ] bring similar agentic capabilities into terminal-based development environments, enabling models to read and modify repositories, execute shell commands, and incorpo-rate external resources such as web retrieval and search grounding. Despite their rapid adoption in both research and practice, systematic methods for testing and evaluating these agents remain underexplored. Existing evaluation approaches largely focus on end-task success (e.g., patch correctness), offering limited visibility into intermediate behaviors, failure modes, or robustness under distributional shifts [ 10 , 13 , 14 , 18 ]. This gap motivates the need for testing methodologies that target Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA 

the behavioral dynamics of agentic workflows rather than just their final outputs. 

2.2 Fuzzing Testing 

Fuzzing has long been used to expose reliability and se-curity defects by generating many varied inputs and ob-serving where systems break [ 16 ]. Early fuzzing approaches were primarily black -box, producing inputs without feed-back from the system under test [ 15 ]. While simple, these methods often struggled to achieve deep code coverage. To improve effectiveness, grey - box fuzzers incorporate light-weight instrumentation and execution feedback, enabling evolutionary strategies that progressively explore new pro-gram paths [ 6 , 12 ]. AFL (American Fuzzy Lop) exemplifies this paradigm, using coverage information to evolve inputs that uncover bugs with minimal human guidance [1]. Complementing grey -box approaches, white -box fuzzing integrates symbolic execution and constraint solving to rea-son about program paths and generate inputs satisfying spe-cific execution conditions. Tools such as SAGE demonstrate that constraint-driven fuzzing can systematically traverse complex code paths, revealing deep logic bugs that random mutation strategies often miss [8]. Along these lines, several studies have explored the in-tegration of machine learning with fuzzing to prioritize high -value inputs or predict coverage outcomes to help over-come limitations of purely random or heuristic mutation strategies [ 9, 24 ]. Recent work has explored integrating LLMs into fuzz testing to improve input generation, seed selection, and driver synthesis. ELFuzz uses LLM-guided synthesis over a fuzzer space to generate grammar-aware fuzzers that improve coverage and reveal bugs [ 7]. Fuzz4All generalizes this approach with a universal fuzzer, iteratively generating realistic inputs across multiple languages and targets [ 22 ]. LLMs have also been applied to embedded systems, as in Fuzzing BusyBox, which leverages LLM-generated seeds and crash reuse to efficiently uncover vulnerabilities [ 17 ]. Beyond textual inputs, hybrid approaches synthesize generators for complex, non-textual inputs, achieving broad coverage at low cost [ 25 ]. These works illustrate how LLMs can com-plement traditional fuzzing strategies, enabling semantic, context-aware, and scalable input generation. Our work builds on this foundation by extending tradi-tional fuzzing concepts to behavioral fuzzing of AI coding agents. Unlike conventional fuzzing, which focuses on un-covering low-level execution faults such as crashes, memory errors, or assertion violations, behavioral fuzzing targets higher-level functional and interactive anomalies. 

## 3 Approach 

As shown in Figure 1, ABTest operates through five stages to test a given coding agent. First, it mines historical user-reported behavioral anomalies and abstracts them into reusable 

Figure 1. The overview of ABTest Interaction Patterns and Action Types (Section 3.1). Second, it composes compatible pairs into reusable fuzzing seed tem-plates (Section 3.2). Third, it instantiates each seed template into a repository-grounded task candidate within an isolated workspace based on a real-world repository (Section 3.3). Fourth, it executes the instantiated case with a coding agent within the repository and records prompts, command traces, file-change evidence, and generated artifacts (Section 3.4). Finally, it uses automatic checks to identify suspect cases with potential behavior anomalies (Section 3.5). 

3.1 Behavioral Anomaly Collection and Pattern Mining 

ABTest adopts a history-driven approach, starting by mining historical user-reported and developer confirmed anomalies to identify recurring Interaction Patterns and Action Types ,which are then used to generate test cases for triggering new behavioral anomalies. In this study, we focus on GitHub issues for Claude Code, OpenAI Codex CLI, and Gemini CLI, covering reports submitted between July 2025 and January 2026. We prioritize issues that are developer-confirmed and fixed, labeled as bugs, or supported by strong evidence, as these provide robust behavioral data for downstream abstrac-tion. This process yields a total of 400 issues for analysis. We Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Wuyang Dai, Moses Openja, Hung Viet Pham, Gias Uddin, Jinqiu Yang, and Song Wang 

Figure 2. Simplified report of Gemini CLI issue #4586: the issue describes Gemini CLI “losing” files during an in-folder file organization request and includes an attached transcript of the full PowerShell session. 

> Raw transcript excerpt
> User
> > ok no need to rename the directory you are in. just move all the existing files within it to anuraag_xyz project folder.
> Agent
> It appears I’ve already moved the files in the previous step. The directory C:\Users\Anuraag Gupta\Desktop\claude-code-experiments should now be empty except for the newly created anuraag_xyz project directory.
> Agent
> I will list the contents of the current directory to confirm.
> Tool
> ReadFolder ...
> Tool
> Listed 9 item(s). (1 git-ignored)
> Agent
> I apologize, it seems my previous attempt to move the files was not fully successful. I will try again to move the remaining folders.

Figure 3. Transcript excerpt from Gemini CLI issue #4586, preserving the original sequence of claims and checks from the run trace. then follow a systematic procedure to analyze these issues and extract the corresponding Interaction Patterns and Action Types .

> Raw transcript excerpt (anonymized)
> Agent
> I have failed you. I have lost your files, and I cannot find them. My repeated errors have made the situation worse, and I am deeply sorry for the unacceptable level of service I have provided. I have exhausted all my available tools and methods. I can no longer be of assistance in this matter. I strongly recommend you check your system’s Recycle Bin, as it is possible my faulty commands moved the files there. I am truly sorry for the damage I have caused.

Figure 4. Transcript excerpt from Gemini CLI issue #4586, preserving the original loss-claim wording from the run trace. 

Step 1: Collect Anomaly Reports. We retain only re-ports that contain enough behavioral evidence for later re-construction, such as a detailed issue body, an attached tran-script, file-state observations, or linked execution logs. Re-ports centered on UI behavior, service-side API issues, billing, or authentication are excluded because they do not map cleanly to repository-grounded task execution. Figure 2 shows a representative example from Gemini CLI issue #4586, where the user asked the tool to organize files in the current folder, but the tool then claimed the files were gone. The user expected a graceful failure and clear error reporting, not a fabricated file-loss outcome. Figure 3 presents an excerpt of the interaction trace in which the agent initially claims that the files have already been moved, checks the directory state, and later acknowledges that the operation was not fully successful, while Figure 4 shows a later excerpt where the agent escalates to the unsupported claim that it has lost the user’s files and suggests checking the Recycle Bin. Together, these figures illustrate the type of source report we retain, containing both a clear user-level anomaly description and sufficient step-level evidence to support downstream abstraction. 

Step 2: Extract Interaction Patterns and Action types 

After collecting the anomaly reports, we further extract the key behavioral elements needed for reusable task con-struction. These elements are not treated as a separate output artifact of the framework; instead, they serve as the abstrac-tion basis for defining reusable Interaction Patterns and Action Types . We define these two terms as follows. 

• An Interaction Pattern denotes a high-level pattern of user intent and workflow, such as editing, file ma-nipulation, or command execution, capturing what the user is trying to achieve. Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA 

Table 1. Representative abstractions contributed by the Gem-ini CLI issue #4586 running example.           

> Interaction Pattern
> description perform file-organization step; inspect resulting state; attempt repair or restoration; verify final state seq_skeleton_steps attempt workspace operation →verify workspace state →expose mismatch or recov-ery outcome
> Action Type
> action_category File Operation description organize files in the current directory while pre-serving a recoverable workspace state

• An Action Type represents a concrete, tool-level op-eration carried out within an interaction, such as ap-plying a patch, moving a file, or invoking a command, capturing how the system realizes the intent. At a high level, this abstraction captures the requested workflow, the stressed operation, the expected state change, and the point at which the anomaly becomes observable. This level of abstraction is sufficient for the goals of this study, namely, to build a reusable inventory for repository-grounded task generation rather than to exhaustively encode all linguistic variations present in the source reports. Using the example from Step 1, Figure 2, we extract the high-level task intent and user expectation: the tool is asked to organize files in the current directory, and it is expected to fail gracefully rather than hallucinate file loss. From Fig-ure 3, we derive intermediate behavioral cues that make the anomaly operational for testing, including the agent’s claim that files have already been moved, the mismatch between this claim and the observed directory state, and the later acknowledgment that the operation was not fully successful. From Figure 4, we extract an additional clue about response behavior under uncertainty, where the agent escalates to an unsupported “lost files” claim and suggests checking the Recycle Bin instead of stopping at the detected inconsistency. Together, these abstracted elements preserve the core behav-iors to be tested, namely, file organization under relocation stress, inconsistency between claimed and observed state, and misleading escalation in place of graceful failure. Table 1 shows one representative Interaction Pattern ab-straction and one representative Action Type abstraction in the current inventory to which this example contributes. Here, the Interaction Pattern is represented at two levels: 

description summarizes the workflow at a compact ab-stract level, whereas seq_skeleton_steps gives a more op-erational step skeleton showing how that workflow typically unfolds. On the action side, action_category names the broader operation family, while description states the con-crete stressed behavior contributed by this example. 

> Seed Template Example
> {
> "seed_template_id" : "0001",
> "interaction_body" : {
> "IP_id" : "27",
> "Interaction_Pattern" : "attempt operation -> partial artifacts remain -> verify resulting state -> expose incomplete rollback",
> "seq_skeleton_steps" : [ "Run <COMMAND>", "Generate <OUTPUT_FILE> and <AUX_FILE>", "Verify both exist", "Validate schema and non-empty" ]},
> "action" : {
> "action_id" : "68",
> "stressed_operation" : "rollback and cleanup after file-producing execution",
> "target_anomaly_surface" : "undo/rollback failure",
> "observable_failure_signal" : "EXIT_ZERO_UNEXPECTED / OUTPUT_MALFORMED",
> "baseline_prompt" : "Apply changes to <FILE> then rollback to previous state.",
> "typical_fuzz_direction" : [ "trigger rollback after partial artifact creation", "require cleanup of one artifact while preserving another", "introduce conflict or missing state during rollback verification" ]}}

Figure 5. Seed template example formed from a compatible 

Interaction Pattern –Action Type pair, shown as the original compact JSON artifact used by the pipeline. We derive these abstractions iteratively over the collected anomaly reports. When multiple reports share the same workflow pattern but differ in surface details, they are grouped under one Interaction Type pattern. When reports stress sim-ilar operations under different workflow structures, they can contribute to the same Action Type while mapping to different Interaction Patterns .Applying this rule over the retained source set (400 is-sues from Claude Code, OpenAI Codex, and Gemini CLI) yields 47 Interaction Patterns and 128 Action Types used in the current study. We show the full interaction-type and action inventories in our replication package 1, respectively. 

3.2 Fuzzing Seed Template Generation 

In this stage, we generate seed templates based on the iden-tified Interaction Patterns and Action Types . Each template encodes a recurring workflow pattern together with the key operation to be stressed, providing a structured starting point for task construction. Because these abstractions are derived from historical bugs, the resulting fuzzing seeds are more targeted and better scoped, focusing on behaviors that have previously led to failures. This allows the generated tasks to systematically exercise critical interaction paths, increasing the likelihood of exposing similar or related issues in coding tools.  

> 1https://anonymous.4open.science/r/data-A421 Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Wuyang Dai, Moses Openja, Hung Viet Pham, Gias Uddin, Jinqiu Yang, and Song Wang

In this work, a seed template consists of a pair of com-patible Interaction Type and Action . Figure 5 illustrates a seed template. We consider a candidate pair to be compatible when three conditions hold: first, the workflow encoded by the interaction type provides a natural point at which the action’s stressed operation can be inserted; second, the com-bined pattern forms a coherent task sequence rather than an artificial combination of unrelated steps; and third, the anomaly targeted by the action remains observable within that workflow through expected evidence such as execution traces, file states, or generated artifacts. Using the Gemini CLI running example from Section 3.1, the compatibility cri-teria can be applied directly. The file-organization action is compatible with the workspace-operation interaction pat-tern because it fits naturally into the workflow, keeps the se-quence coherent, and leaves the anomaly observable through file-state mismatch, failed restoration, or contradictory ex-ecution evidence. By contrast, an action about invoking an external tool or service would not be compatible, because it would introduce a different task dependency and shift the case away from workspace-state consistency. We use an LLM-based seed generator for seed template generation that applies these criteria to systematically eval-uate all candidate Interaction Pattern and Action Type pairs. For each pair, the model assesses whether the action can be naturally embedded into the interaction workflow, whether the resulting sequence remains coherent, and whether the targeted anomaly would still be observable through execu-tion traces, file states, or other artifacts. This automated screening allows us to efficiently explore a large combina-tion space while maintaining consistency in applying the compatibility criteria. As a result, 647 pairs are identified as valid seed templates from the 47 Interaction Patterns and 128 

Action Types collected in Section 3.1, forming a structured and diverse basis for subsequent task instantiation. 

3.3 Instantiating Fuzzing Cases from Seed Templates 

Once a seed template is available, we use a task generator to instantiate it into repository-grounded task candidates. Rather than letting the task generator freely invent tasks, we provide it with the seed template, retrieved repository con-text, and explicit output constraints so that it produces struc-tured task candidates that are executable and later checkable. 

Task Generator. The task generator is an LLM-based component that turns a seed template into a concrete multi-step task candidate. During test generation, the model does more than simply bind repository-specific details such as file paths, command targets, and artifact locations. It also de-termines how the selected Action should be incorporated into, or elaborated within, the workflow defined by the chosen Interaction Pattern . Figure 6 shows an instantiated test case derived from this template. The selected Action Type is reflected directly in the added rollback step S05 ,            

> Instantiated Candidate Example ( Test-0001 )
> {
> "case_id" : "Test-0001",
> "candidate_id" : "1",
> "instruction_sequence" : [ {"step_id" : "S01", "instruction" : "Run python -m pytest tests/test_types.py -v" }, {"step_id" : "S02", "instruction" : "Generate output/test_report.json and output/coverage.xml" }, {"step_id" : "S03", "instruction" : "Verify both output files exist" }, {"step_id" : "S04", "instruction" : "Validate test_report.json has non-empty" "results" }, {"step_id" : "S05", "instruction" : "Rollback test output by deleting" "output/test_report.json" }, {"step_id" : "S06", "instruction" : "Verify output/coverage.xml still exists" } ],
> "rollback_steps" : ["S05"],
> "rollback_failure_patterns" : ["not found", "permission denied"],
> "post_rollback_verification_steps" : ["S06"],
> "expected_new_files" : ["output/coverage.xml"],
> "expected_modified_files" : ["logs/tool.log"] }

Figure 6. Repository-grounded instantiated test case exam-ple for Test-0001 , shown as the compact JSON artifact used in execution. post-rollback verification step S06 , the expected new arti-fact output/coverage.xml , and the expected file change to 

logs/tool.log , whereas the Interaction Pattern is expressed more diffusely through the overall workflow structure that these action-specific steps are inserted into. These action-side expectations are not universal to every instantiated candidate; they appear only when the selected Action Type 

requires corresponding repository-side effects or artifact constraints. 

Structural Constraint Configuration for Instantiated Task. The instantiated tasks from the above step should be constrained rather than free-form. In our implementation, the task generator must return strict JSON under a predefined schema, keep the instruction sequence within a bounded length, use workspace-relative artifact paths, and follow the intended semantics of the generated fields. The seed template is therefore not copied literally, but expanded under explicit structural constraints, e.g., every path in expected_artifacts 

must be workspace-relative, with absolute paths and path traversal disallowed, so that variation remains controlled rather than free-form. 

3.4 Execution Fuzzing Case with A Coding Agent 

In this stage, each instantiated task is executed step by step in a repository-grounded workspace. Every task runs in a fresh, case-local environment: the runtime setup is fixed across cases, while the repository is reset for each execution to prevent cross-case contamination. Each case is executed in one continuous agent session (one context window), and all steps in that case are issued within that same session rather than in separate per-step sessions. Within a case, state is Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA  

> Trace Capture Example: Test-0001 / S05
> {
> "case_id" : "Test-0001",
> "candidate_id" : "1",
> "step_id" : "S05",
> "captured_trace" : {
> "step_05_prompt" : "Rollback test output by deleting" "output/test_report.json",
> "event_trace_summary" : [ "agent issued rm output/test_report.json", "agent then re-ran pytest with json-report and coverage" "outputs", "agent attempted to replace content in" "repo_under_test/click/tests/test_utils.py", "replace operation failed because the old string was not found" ],
> "agent_last_message_excerpt" : [ "I encountered an error: Failed to edit", "repo_under_test/click/tests/test_utils.py", "because 0 occurrences were found", "for the target string.", "The agent then reasoned about re-reading", "the file and re-running tests." ],
> "file_change" : {
> "unexpected_changed_files" : [ "repo_under_test/click/tests/test_utils.py" ],
> "added_files" : [ ".coverage", "output/coverage.xml", "output/test_report.json" ]}}}

Figure 7. Compact JSON trace artifact for case Test-0001 ,step S05 .preserved across steps, since later instructions often depend on artifacts produced earlier. For example, a task may first require generating a file and then validating or repairing it in subsequent steps. Operationally, each step corresponds to a single coding-agent invocation within the same workspace, with a per-step time limit enforced throughout execution. This design ensures both reproducible isolation across cases and realistic multi-step statefulness within each case. Beyond a final pass or fail outcome, we record detailed ex-ecution data at both the step and run levels. For each step, we capture the prompt, the resulting command and tool traces, and the agent’s final response. At the run level, we retain execution metadata, oracle outputs, file-change evidence, and all generated artifacts in the workspace. File-change evi-dence is tracked as concrete repository-level modifications, including added, modified, and deleted files, rather than as a single aggregate status. Using the same example as in Section 3.3, the instantiated candidate leaves a step-level trace bundle during execution. Figure 7 shows a compact trace view for the rollback step S05 .In this step, we capture the rollback prompt itself, a summary of the agent’s command and tool actions, an excerpt of the agent’s final message, file-change evidence showing an unex-pected modification to /tests/test_utils.py , and the re-sulting artifact state indicating that output/coverage.xml 

remained present while output/test_report.json was re-generated. This example illustrates how our framework pre-serves prompt-level, trace-level, file-change, and artifact-level evidence together, so that each executed case can later be reviewed as a concrete execution episode rather than as a single binary label. 

3.5 Test Outcome Verification 

After a task is executed by an agent, we analyze its behavior across the entire execution process using the recorded ex-ecution data (see Section 3.4), including step prompts, tool traces, file changes, and final responses. This allows us to reconstruct how the agent interprets instructions, interacts with the environment, and evolves the workspace state over time. The goal of ABTest is to reveal potential behavioral anom-alies rather than to judge the correctness of final task out-comes. Accordingly, our analysis focuses on two key aspects: (1) instruction following, that is, whether the agent’s ac-tions and responses are consistent with the given prompts across steps; and (2) action consistency, that is, whether the observed effects on the repository, such as file creations, mod-ifications, or deletions, align with the expected operations implied by the task. This enables us to detect issues such as inconsistent claims, missing or spurious actions, and mis-leading responses, even when the final output may appear superficially plausible. We also observe that not all tasks are completed success-fully, as some executions terminate prematurely with an exit code or fail to proceed through all steps. Since such in-complete runs do not provide sufficient evidence for reliable behavioral analysis, we first filter them out based on the recorded execution information. The remaining executions are passed to a checker, which reads the full trace bundle from Section 3.4 to identify po-tential anomalies grounded in both the agent’s responses and the concrete state changes in the workspace. Our result checking organizes outcomes into four categories based on the severity and symptoms of the observed anomaly: 

• no_anomaly indicates that the execution follows the instructions and produces expected actions without observable irregularities. 

• critical_anomaly captures severe and blocking is-sues, such as timeouts, incomplete executions, or un-expected file-scope mutations that violate task con-straints (e.g., unintended modifications to existing files beyond the allowed scope). 

• expected_outcome_anomaly denotes cases where ex-pected artifacts or required effects specified by the task are not produced or observed. Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Wuyang Dai, Moses Openja, Hung Viet Pham, Gias Uddin, Jinqiu Yang, and Song Wang 

• minor_anomaly captures subtle but meaningful irreg-ularities, such as inconsistent claims or suspicious ac-tions, that may be diagnostically useful. These typ-ically correspond to internal step-level failures that the agent recovers from autonomously, representing issues that are significant for developers analyzing behavior but do not affect the end-user experience. Taking the example in Section 3.4, the run is flagged as a potential critical_anomaly because the recorded evidence shows an unexpected modification to /tests/test_utils.py ,even though the task is centered on output artifacts and roll-back behavior rather than edits to that repository file. 

## 4 Experiment Setup 

4.1 Experiment Base Repository 

For our experiments, we select the repository Pallets Click 2

as the base for running fuzzing cases generated by ABTest to evaluate coding agents. This repository is chosen carefully because it strikes a balance between size and complexity. In our setting, the specific domain content of the repository is not the primary variable, so we use a well-maintained, structurally complete, and relatively lightweight repository 

Pallets Click , which preserves realistic coding workflows while keeping experiment cost manageable. 

4.2 Experimented AI Coding Agents 

We conduct experiments with three popular AI coding agents: Claude Code [ 2 ], OpenAI Codex [ 3 ], and Gemini CLI [ 4]. To investigate the impact of different underlying LLMs, we drive these agents with multiple model configurations. For Claude Code, we use Claude 4.5 Haiku and Claude 3.5 Haiku; for Codex, we evaluate GPT-5.1-Codex-Mini and GPT-4o-Mini. For Gemini CLI, we restrict our experiments to Gemini 2.5 Flash-Lite. These LLMs were chosen primarily to balance model capability with budget constraints, selecting versions that are both high-performing and feasible to evaluate at scale. For Gemini CLI, we report results from a single config-uration rather than multiple model variants. This choice is methodological rather than preferential: Gemini CLI in-cludes an internal fallback mechanism, making a full model sweep less informative compared to the other agents. Lim-iting the comparison to one configuration ensures that the Gemini results remain interpretable at the combined model-and-runner level. As introduced in Section 3.1, we focus on GitHub issues re-ported by end users for the three coding agents between July 2025 and January 2026. We prioritize developer-confirmed, fixed bug reports, yielding 400 issues for mining Interaction Patterns and Action Types . Based on these, 647 fuzz seed templates were generated (Section 3.2). In this study, we 

> 2https://github.com/pallets/click

generate one concrete test case per seed template due to bud-get constraints. Running the full set of 647 tests across five coding-agent configurations with different LLMs has already incurred a cost of over $2,100. [[David: please confirm the cost]] 4.3 Research Questions 

This section presents the experimental research questions designed to assess the effectiveness of ABTest in identifying behavioral anomalies exhibited by coding agents. 

RQ1 How many behavioral anomalies can ABTest detect for the three AI coding agents? 

RQ2 Which Interaction Patterns and Action types are most effective at detecting behavioral anomalies? 

RQ3 How do underlying LLMs influence the detection of behavioral anomalies? In RQ1, we measure the number of behavioral anomalies 

ABTest can detect across three AI coding agents. RQ2 iden-tifies which Interaction Patterns and Action Types are most effective in revealing anomalies. RQ3 explores the impact of the choice of underlying LLM on the effectiveness of behav-ioral anomaly detection. 

4.4 Evaluation Metric 

To measure the accuracy of ABTest in detecting behavioral anomalies, we use the metric Precision , defined as the num-ber of true behavioral anomalies divided by the total number of reported anomalies. For each reported anomaly, two of the authors manually review the task specification along with the recorded prompts, step traces, final assistant mes-sages, file-change evidence, and any generated artifacts. This manual inspection ensures that each flagged run is correctly classified as a true anomaly rather than noise, providing a reliable evaluation of ABTest ’s detection performance. 

## 5 Results 

5.1 RQ1: Performance of Behavioral Anomaly Detection 

Table 2 reports the performance of ABTest in detecting be-havioral anomalies across the evaluated AI coding agents and model configurations. In total, the five configurations produce 1,573 flagged anomalies, of which 642 are retained after evidence-based review, yielding an overall detection precision of 40.8%. At the configuration level, this rate ranges from 23.1% for Claude Code + Claude 3.5 Haiku to 59.9% for Codex CLI + GPT-5.1-Codex-Mini. Gemini CLI + Gemini 2.5 Flash-Lite reaches 53.5%, Claude Code + Claude 4.5 Haiku reaches 45.9%, and Codex CLI + GPT-4o-mini reaches 28.4%. Overall, the retained set contains 134 critical_anomaly ,140 expected_outcome_anomaly , and 368 minor_anomaly 

cases, so minor_anomaly is the dominant retained class in the full review set. Claude Code + Claude 4.5 Haiku and Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA 

Table 2. Performance of ABTest in detecting behavioral anomalies across the evaluated AI coding agents and model configura-tions. Under Overall Performance , we separately report the total number of anomalies reported by ABTest , the number of manually validated true anomalies, and the resulting accuracy. 

Agent LLM 

Overall Performance #Critical Anomaly #Expected Outcome Anomaly #Minor Anomaly #Reported Anomaly #Verified True Anomaly Precision Codex CLI GPT-5.1-Codex-Mini 277 166 59.9% 18 41 107 Codex CLI GPT-4o-mini 334 95 28.4% 8 41 46 Claude Code Claude 4.5 Haiku 259 119 45.9% 23 15 81 Claude Code Claude 3.5 Haiku 376 87 23.1% 22 33 32 Gemini CLI Gemini 2.5 Flash-Lite 327 175 53.5% 63 10 102 

Total 1573 642 40.8% 134 140 368 

Table 3. Top-10 Interaction Patterns ranked by the number of true anomalies detected for each pattern. #anomaly represents the number of true behavioral anomalies identified for each corresponding pattern. 

ID Interaction Pattern description seq_skeleton_steps #anomaly 

IP-28 validate outcome against stated constraints →

emit requested result Validate that the task outcome meets the stated constraints; Out-put a pass/fail result only (no extra text) 23 IP-39 run operation → derive structured result from execution evidence → validate output con-straints → persist result Run <COMMAND>; Extract structured result from logs accord-ing to contract; Validate format constraints; Save parsed result to <OUTPUT_FILE> 19 IP-26 generate output → persist narrative artifact 

→ persist structured artifact → validate both Generate report content; Save narrative report to <OUT-PUT_FILE>; Save structured summary to <OUTPUT_META>; Validate both 18 IP-44 attempt restricted-path transformation → val-idate permission handling and explicit report-ing → persist result → verify no silent skip Attempt transformation touching restricted paths; Validate permission handling+explicit report; Write result to <OUT-PUT_FILE>; Verify no silent skip 17 IP-05 run operation → observe failure state → ap-ply corrective action → re-run operation →

persist outcome Run <COMMAND>; Observe failure; Apply minimal change; Re-run <COMMAND>; Save outcome to <OUTPUT_FILE> 16 IP-47 set low usage cap → run operation → verify bounded stop → check usage accounting and stop reason → capture execution evidence Set low budget/usage cap; Run <COMMAND>; Verify stops at limit; Logs include cost accounted+stop reason; Save logs to <OUTPUT_FILE> 14 IP-40 run operation → verify bounded termination 

→ check runtime evidence → assert comple-tion policy → capture execution evidence Run <COMMAND> with explicit time limit; Verify terminates (no hang); Logs include stop reason and runtime evidence; Assert exit code policy; Save logs to <OUTPUT_FILE> 14 IP-41 start operation producing artifact → interrupt mid-run → verify partial-artifact handling →

re-run operation → validate final output Start <COMMAND> producing <OUTPUT_FILE>; Cancel mid-run; Verify atomic/partial artifact handling; Re-run <COM-MAND>; Verify idempotent final <OUTPUT_FILE>; Validate format constraints 13 IP-12 generate artifact → persist artifact Generate output; Save to <OUTPUT_FILE> (output should satisfy basic validity constraints) 12 IP-36 prepare isolated environment → run operation 

→ validate outputs → persist execution record Prepare container environment (use a predefined base image and avoid installing unknown dependencies); Run <COMMAND> inside container; Validate outputs; Save container logs to <OUT-PUT_FILE> 8

Codex CLI + GPT-5.1-Codex-Mini are both dominated by 

minor_anomaly , with 68.1% and 64.5% of their retained sets falling into that category. By contrast, Claude Code + Claude 3.5 Haiku and Codex CLI + GPT-4o-mini show much larger 

expected_outcome_anomaly shares, at 37.9% and 43.2%, in-dicating more frequent failures to realize the required arti-fact or completion state. Gemini CLI + Gemini 2.5 Flash-Lite stands out for the largest critical_anomaly share at 36.0%, substantially higher than the other four configurations, sug-gesting that its retained failures more often involve boundary Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Wuyang Dai, Moses Openja, Hung Viet Pham, Gias Uddin, Jinqiu Yang, and Song Wang 

Table 4. Top-10 Action Types sorting by the number of de-tected true anomalies.                

> ID action_type description #anomaly
> 3Command Execution Satisfy conflicting output instructions in a single request. 19 85 CLI / Terminal Interaction Run with verbose logging enabled while protecting sensitive values. 17 13 File Operation Write the requested result without overwriting an existing artifact. 14 24 Configuration Setup Run with configuration plus conflicting environment overrides. 13 40 Environment & Platform Create nested directories under <WORKDIR> until path length is very long. 13 77 Model Output Control Run the requested verification workflow and report the result. 13 99 Resource Management Run the requested workflow in parallel and collect results. 12 28 Configuration Setup Run a representative build or integration workflow in <WORKDIR>. 11 76 Model Output Control Generate a deterministic bounded output from <INPUT_FILE>. 11 80 Model Output Control Output a large valid structured result. 11

overreach or other higher-impact deviations rather than only incomplete outcomes. 

Answer to RQ1: Across the five coding-agent configu-rations, ABTest reported 1,573 behavioral anomalies and retains 642 of them after evidence-based manual verifica-tion, yielding an average precision of 40.8%. 

5.2 RQ2: Effectiveness of Interaction Pattern and Action Types 

To answer this question, we analyze the effectiveness of different Interaction Patterns and Action Types in detecting behavioral anomalies. Specifically, we aggregate the number of true positives for each anomaly type, i.e., critical_anomaly ,

expected_outcome_anomaly , and minor_anomaly , across the three coding agents over five experimental runs. Each run tests 647 fuzz cases, resulting in a combined total of 647 ×

5 = 3, 235 fuzz case executions. From these, 642 validated anomalies are manually verified, providing a robust dataset to evaluate which interactions and actions are most effective at detecting different types of behavioral anomalies. For each anomaly type, we then rank the Interaction Pat-terns and Action Types based on the number of true positives they produce, which allows us to identify which interactions and actions are most informative for revealing different kinds of behavioral anomalies. Note that we have 47 Interaction Patterns and 128 Action Types . Due to space limitations, in this research question, we only present the top 10 most fre-quent types for each of the three anomaly categories. The full rankings are available in our replication package. Table 3 shows the top-10 Interaction Patterns , while Table 4 presents the top-10 Action Types .As we can see from the tables, the most effective inter-action patterns for detecting true behavioral anomalies are those combining execution, validation, and persistence, of-ten with special handling of edge cases. IP-28 (validate outcome → emit result) leads with 23 anomalies, followed by multi-step patterns like IP-39 and IP-26 that include ex-tracting structured results, validating constraints, and saving outputs. Patterns involving interruptions, restricted paths, or bounded execution ( IP-44 , IP-41 , IP-47 ) also show high anomaly counts, highlighting error-prone scenarios. In con-trast, simpler generate-and-persist patterns ( IP-12 , IP-36 )exhibit fewer anomalies, indicating that complexity and con-ditional handling strongly correlate with anomaly detection effectiveness. The most effective action types include Command Exe-cution , which triggers 19 anomalies by satisfying conflict-ing output instructions, and CLI/Terminal Interaction ,causing 17 anomalies when run with verbose logging while protecting sensitive values. File Operation follows with 14 anomalies, reflecting issues in writing results without over-writing existing artifacts. Several action types, such as Con-figuration Setup , Environment & Platform , and Model Output Control , each account for 11–13 anomalies. These findings highlight that operations involving command ex-ecution, file handling, and output control are particularly prone to behavioral deviations in AI coding agents. 

Answer to RQ2: The highest-retained Interaction Pat-terns are patterns with explicit validation, reporting, or no-silent-skip checks, while the highest-retained Action Types are led overall by Model Output Control , CLI/Termi-nal Interaction , and File Operation .

5.3 RQ3: Impact of Underlying LLMs 

In this research question, we aim to understand the impact of underlying LLMs on the effectiveness of behavioral anomaly detection. Specifically, we focus on Claude Code and Codex CLI, as both support multiple configurable LLM backends, enabling controlled comparisons across models within the same agent framework. To highlight the differences in true behavioral anomalies detected by a coding agent when using different LLMs, we construct a series of comparative visu-alizations. These plots illustrate both the shared anomalies that appear across multiple LLMs and the model-specific anomalies unique to each LLM. Figure 8 shows the overlap of true behavioral anomalies de-tected by the Claude Code agent across Claude 4.5 Haiku and Claude 3.5 Haiku, categorized by anomaly type. The overlap is consistently small across all three anomaly types, while both sides keep large unique slices. This pattern indicates Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA 

19 

4

18 

> Claude 4.5 Haiku
> Claude 3.5 Haiku

(a) Critical anomaly 

12 

3

30 

> Claude 4.5 Haiku
> Claude 3.5 Haiku

(b) Expected outcome anomaly 

79 

2

30 

> Claude 4.5 Haiku
> Claude 3.5 Haiku

(c) Minor anomaly 

Figure 8. Overlap decomposition by anomaly type for the Claude Code with LLMs, i.e., Claude 4.5 Haiku vs. Claude 3.5 Haiku. 

17 

1

7 

> GPT-5.1 Codex-Mini GPT-4o-mini

(a) Critical anomaly 

35 

6

35  

> GPT-5.1 Codex-Mini GPT-4o-mini

(b) Expected outcome anomaly 

86 

21 

25  

> GPT-5.1 Codex-Mini GPT-4o-mini

(c) Minor anomaly 

Figure 9. Overlap decomposition by anomaly type for the Codex with different LLMs, i.e., GPT-5.1-Codex-Mini vs GPT-4o-mini. 

Table 5. The dominant Interaction Patterns and Action Types underlying both shared and model-specific anomalies detected by coding agents when comparing different LLMs 

Claude Code 

Claude 4.5 Haiku vs Claude 3.5 Haiku 

Case subset Dominant Interaction Patterns Dominant Action Types Dominant anomaly behavior 

shared structured-output validation, context-grounded result emission, and bounded-stop checking output control, configuration han-dling, and file operations recurring scaffold weakness in keeping paths, config state, and machine-readable outputs aligned Claude 4.5 unique related-artifact validation, large-output handling, and workflow continuation after drift file operations, command execu-tion, and session/state handling keeps acting after drift and expands the workflow with extra helper ar-tifacts Claude 3.5 unique structured-output validation, large-output com-pletion, and context-grounded result emission configuration handling, output control, and file operations turns partial or failed execution into superficially plausible comple-tion 

Codex CLI 

GPT-5.1-Codex-Mini vs GPT-4o-mini 

Case subset Dominant Interaction Patterns Dominant Action Types Dominant anomaly behavior 

shared large-output handling, related-artifact validation, structured-output validation, and multi-artifact checks file operations, command execu-tion, and environment handling common incompleteness on output-heavy workflows with explicit vali-dation GPT-5.1 unique related-artifact validation, structured-output vali-dation, and large-output completion under pres-sure output control, file operations, and command execution keeps pushing to complete under pressure and over-acts GPT-4o unique structured-output validation, context-analysis, and configuration-sensitive CLI workflows CLI interaction, configuration handling, and resource manage-ment stops short of required effects and substitutes helper workflows 

that the two Claude models share only a narrow common failure and diverge strongly in how failures are realized un-der the same scaffold. Combined with Table 5, this supports Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Wuyang Dai, Moses Openja, Hung Viet Pham, Gias Uddin, Jinqiu Yang, and Song Wang 

the interpretation that Claude 4.5 is more prone to workflow expansion after drift, whereas Claude 3.5 is more prone to superficially plausible completion after partial failure. Figure 9 shows the overlap of true behavioral anomalies detected by the Codex CLI agent across GPT-5.1-Codex-Mini and GPT-4o-mini, categorized by anomaly type. The overlap is uneven by anomaly type. Critical overlap is minimal (1 shared), expected-outcome overlap is moderate (6 shared), and minor overlap is much larger (21 shared). This suggests that the Codex scaffold has a stronger common surface in lower-severity completion and workflow issues, while high-impact failures remain more model-conditioned. Table 5 is consistent with this split: GPT-5.1-Codex-Mini tends to push completion under pressure, while GPT-4o-mini more often stops short and substitutes helper workflows or stand-in artifacts. In addition, the figures show that the differences are sys-tematic under fixed test conditions, consistently appearing across repeated runs rather than arising from random vari-ation or execution noise. This cross-LLM split in detected anomalies provides insight into whether a behavioral anom-aly originates from the intrinsic characteristics of the LLM or from the agentic components of the coding agent. By ex-amining which anomalies are shared versus model-specific, we can identify whether unexpected behaviors stem from the underlying language model itself or from the agent’s orchestration and execution mechanisms. 

Answer to RQ3: Anomalies detected by a coding agent vary significantly across LLMs. Most anomalies are model-specific, with only a few shared, showing that the differ-ences are systematic. This highlights the impact of LLM choice on agent behavior and the importance of evaluat-ing multiple models for reliable anomaly detection. 

## 6 Discussion 

This section addresses our study’s open questions: Section 6.1 explains why ABTest cannot directly reuse user-reported issues and Section 6.2 evaluates the repeatability of detected anomalies. 

6.1 Why Behavioral Tests Cannot Directly Reuse User-Reported Issues 

A single user-reported issue typically identifies the stressed operation or failure point, but is insufficient to reconstruct the full interaction workflow. For instance, a user may report that files were lost during a file operation, from which the ac-tion can be abstracted. However, the surrounding workflow, e.g., the sequence of steps taken, the timing of operations, and the point at which the workspace entered an inconsistent or unexpected state, remains implicit. Fully understanding the behavior often requires synthesizing information across multiple reports or examining supporting logs and artifacts. Beyond the issue of completeness, directly replaying a single report would constrain the test to the surface details of that report, making it overly rigid and limiting its useful-ness. Variations in repository state, file paths, or user intent would not be captured, reducing the potential for discov-ering additional behavioral anomalies. By abstracting into 

Interaction Patterns and Action Types , ABTest retains the es-sential structure of the workflow while leaving room for controlled variation. This abstraction allows the task gener-ator to systematically explore different instantiations of the same underlying failure mode, introducing the behavioral degrees of freedom that fuzzing relies on to uncover subtle, multi-step anomalies. 

6.2 Repeatability of Detected Behavior Anomalies 

To verify the repeatability and robustness of ABTest ’s anom-aly detection, we conducted a series of reruns on the test cases that previously triggered critical behavioral anomalies across the three coding agents under study. Each rerun was executed in a controlled environment to ensure that external factors, such as system load or runtime variations, did not influence the results. The outputs from these reruns were systematically manually inspected, focusing on whether the same anomalies appeared under identical conditions. In ad-dition, we cross-checked the anomalies against the original logs to ensure consistency in both the type and magnitude of the unexpected behaviors. Across all reruns, the results were highly consistent, with over 90% of the initially de-tected anomalies reproduced. This high level of repeatability indicates that the anomalies identified by ABTest are repro-ducible. These findings further support the credibility of 

ABTest as a robust framework for systematically testing cod-ing agents, ensuring that detected anomalies reflect genuine behavioral patterns rather than transient or incidental exe-cution artifacts. 

## 7 Threats to Validity 

Internal Validity. Our results depend on the correctness of anomaly detection and labeling. Although ABTest employs automated checks to flag suspicious behaviors, the final de-termination of true anomalies involves manual validation, which may introduce subjectivity. To mitigate this, we fol-low consistent labeling criteria and inspect execution traces, command logs, and generated artifacts. However, some bor-derline cases may still be misclassified. In addition, the design of test cases, including how Interaction Patterns and Action Types are instantiated, may influence the observed behaviors, potentially introducing bias in anomaly triggering. 

Construct Validity. Our study defines behavioral anom-alies based on deviations from expected user intent and workflow semantics. While this definition captures many real-world issues, it may not cover all possible failure modes. Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA 

Furthermore, the abstraction into Interaction Patterns and Ac-tion Types simplifies complex interactions, which may omit fine-grained contextual factors that influence agent behavior. 

External Validity. The generalizability of our findings may be limited by the selection of coding agents, repositories, and issue reports. We evaluate three widely used agents and a single open-source repository, which may not fully repre-sent the diversity of real-world development environments. Additionally, the mined issues are restricted to GitHub re-ports within a specific time window, potentially introducing sampling bias. Different repositories, domains, or user work-flows may lead to different behavioral characteristics. 

## 8 Conclusion 

This paper presents ABTest , a behavior-driven fuzzing frame-work that transforms real-world failure reports into repository-grounded behavioral tests. ABTest extracts reusable Interac-tion Patterns and Action types , composes stepwise fuzzing seed templates, instantiates executable cases, runs them on coding agents, and validates anomalous behaviors. Applied to Claude Code, OpenAI Codex, and Gemini CLI, ABTest 

generated 647 test cases from 400 developer-confirmed fail-ures, detecting 1,573 anomalies, 642 of which are new true anomalies (40.8% precision), revealing robustness differences and previously unreported behavior anomalies. 

## References 

[1] [n. d.]. American Fuzzy Lop (AFL) GitHub Repository. URL: https://github.com/google/afl. [2] 2025. Claude Code. https://www.claude.com/product/claude-code .Accessed: 2025-12-12. [3] 2025. Codex CLI. https://chatgpt.com/features/codex . Accessed: 2025-12-12. [4] 2025. Gemini CLI. https://geminicli.com . Accessed: 2025-12-12. [5] Mohammad Abdollahi, Ruixin Zhang, Nima Shiri Harzevili, Jiho Shin, Song Wang, and Hadi Hemmati. 2026. Surveying the Benchmarking Landscape of Large Language Models in Code Intelligence. TOSEM 2026 (2026). [6] Shivani Acharya and Vidhi Pandya. 2012. Bridge between black Box and white Box–gray Box testing technique. International Journal of Electronics and Computer Science Engineering 2, 1 (2012), 175–185. [7] Chuyang Chen and Brendan Dolan-Gavitt. 2025. {ELFuzz }: Efficient Input Generation via {LLM-driven } Synthesis Over Fuzzer Space. In 

34th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 25) . 6279–6298. [8] Patrice Godefroid, Michael Y. Levin, and David Molnar. 2012. SAGE: whitebox fuzzing for security testing. Commun. Association for Com-puting Machinery (ACM) 55, 3 (March 2012), 40–44. doi: 10.1145/ 2093548.2093564 

[9] Patrice Godefroid, Hila Peleg, and Rishabh Singh. 2017. Learn&fuzz: Machine learning for input fuzzing. In ASE 2017 . IEEE, 50–59. [10] Carlos E. Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2024. SWE-bench: Can Language Models Resolve Real-World GitHub Issues?. In International Conference on Learning Representations .[11] Haolin Jin, Linghan Huang, Haipeng Cai, Jun Yan, Bo Li, and Huam-ing Chen. 2024. From llms to llm-based agents for software engi-neering: A survey of current, challenges and future. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.02479 (2024). [12] Mohd Ehmer Khan and Farmeena Khan. 2012. A comparative study of white box, black box and grey box testing techniques. International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications 3, 6 (2012). [13] Tianyang Liu, Canwen Xu, and Julian McAuley. 2023. RepoBench: Benchmarking Repository-Level Code Auto-Completion Systems. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03091 (2023). [14] Pengrui Lu, Shiqi Zhang, Yunzhong Hou, Lyumanshan Ye, Chaoyi Huang, Zixi Chen, Ji Zeng, Hantao Jiang, Pengfei Liu, Yiwei Wang, et al . 2026. ProjDevBench: Benchmarking AI Coding Agents on End-to-End Project Development. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.01655 (2026). [15] Barton P Miller, Gregory Cooksey, and Fredrick Moore. 2006. An empirical study of the robustness of macos applications using random testing. In Proceedings of the 1st international workshop on Random testing . 46–54. [16] Barton P. Miller, Lars Fredriksen, and Bryan So. 1990. An Empirical Study of the Reliability of UNIX Utilities. Commun. ACM 33, 12 (1990), 32–44. doi: 10.1145/96267.96279 

[17] Yaroslav Oliinyk, Michael Scott, Ryan Tsang, Chongzhou Fang, Houman Homayoun, et al . 2024. Fuzzing {BusyBox }: Leveraging 

{LLM } and crash reuse for embedded bug unearthing. In 33rd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 24) . 883–900. [18] Hélio Victor F Santos, Vitor Costa, João Eduardo Montandon, and Marco Tulio Valente. 2025. Decoding the Configuration of AI Cod-ing Agents: Insights from Claude Code Projects. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.09268 (2025). [19] Junjie Wang, Yuchao Huang, Chunyang Chen, Zhe Liu, Song Wang, and Qing Wang. 2024. Software testing with large language models: Survey, landscape, and vision. TSE 50, 4 (2024), 911–936. [20] Xingyao Wang, Boxuan Li, Yufan Song, Frank F. Xu, Xiangru Tang, Mingchen Zhuge, Jiayi Pan, Yueqi Song, Bowen Li, Jaskirat Singh, Hoang H. Tran, Fuqiang Li, Ren Ma, Mingzhang Zheng, Bill Qian, Yanjun Shao, Niklas Muennighoff, Yizhe Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Jun-yang Lin, Robert Brennan, Hao Peng, Heng Ji, and Graham Neubig. 2024. OpenHands: An Open Platform for AI Software Developers as Generalist Agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.16741 (2024). [21] Yanlin Wang, Wanjun Zhong, Yanxian Huang, Ensheng Shi, Min Yang, Jiachi Chen, Hui Li, Yuchi Ma, Qianxiang Wang, and Zibin Zheng. 2025. Agents in software engineering: Survey, landscape, and vision. 

Automated Software Engineering 32, 2 (2025), 70. [22] Chunqiu Steven Xia, Matteo Paltenghi, Jia Le Tian, Michael Pradel, and Lingming Zhang. 2024. Fuzz4all: Universal fuzzing with large language models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on Software Engineering . 1–13. [23] John Yang, Carlos E. Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. 2024. SWE-agent: Agent-Computer Interfaces Enable Automated Software Engineering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.15793 (2024). [24] Ao Zhang, Yiying Zhang, Yao Xu, Cong Wang, and Siwei Li. 2023. Machine learning-based fuzz testing techniques: A survey. IEEE Access 

12 (2023), 14437–14454. [25] Kunpeng Zhang, Zongjie Li, Daoyuan Wu, Shuai Wang, and Xin Xia. 2025. {Low-Cost } and Comprehensive Non-textual Input Fuzzing with {LLM-Synthesized } Input Generators. In 34th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 25) . 6999–7018. [26] Ruixin Zhang, Wuyang Dai, Hung Viet Pham, Gias Uddin, Jinqiu Yang, and Song Wang. 2026. Engineering Pitfalls in AI Coding Tools: An Empirical Study of Bugs in Claude Code, Codex, and Gemini CLI. In 

FSE 2026 .[27] Yuntong Zhang, Haifeng Ruan, Zhiyu Fan, and Abhik Roychoudhury. 2024. AutoCodeRover: Autonomous Program Improvement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.05427 (2024). 

Received 28 September 2023; revised 5 March 2024; accepted 16 April 2024