Title: Learning From Developers: Towards Reliable Patch Validation at Scale for Linux

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.24825v1

Published Time: Fri, 27 Mar 2026 00:14:46 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# Learning From Developers: Towards Reliable Patch Validation at Scale for Linux 

# Chih-En Lin Purdue University Attreyee Mukherjee Purdue University Ajay Rawat Purdue University Ruqi Zhang Purdue University Pedro Fonseca Purdue University 

# Abstract 

Patch reviewing is critical for software development, espe-cially in distributed open-source development, which highly depends on voluntary work, such as Linux. This paper studies the past 10 years of patch reviews of the Linux memory man-agement subsystem to characterize the challenges involved in patch reviewing at scale. Our study reveals that the review process is still primarily reliant on human effort despite a wide-range of automatic checking tools. Although kernel de-velopers strive to review all patch proposals, they struggle to keep up with the increasing volume of submissions and depend significantly on a few developers for these reviews. To help scale the patch review process, we introduce FLINT, a patch validation system framework that synthesizes insights from past discussions among developers and auto-matically analyzes patch proposals for compliance. FLINT employs a rule-based analysis informed by past discussions among developers and an LLM that does not require training or fine-tuning on new data, and can continuously improve with minimum human effort. FLINT uses a multi-stage ap-proach to efficiently distill the essential information from past discussions. Later, when a patch proposal needs review, FLINT retrieves the relevant validation rules for validation and generates a reference-backed report that developers can easily interpret and validate. FLINT targets bugs that tradi-tional tools find hard to detect, ranging from maintainabil-ity issues, e.g., design choices and naming conventions, to complex concurrency issues, e.g., deadlocks and data races. FLINT detected 2 new issues in Linux v6.18 development cycle and 7 issues in previous versions. FLINT achieves 21% and 14% of higher ground-truth coverage on concurrency bugs than the baseline with LLM only. Moreover, FLINT achieves a 35% false positive rate, which is lower than the baseline. 

# 1 Introduction 

Large and widely-used open source software systems, par-ticularly for systems like Linux kernel, rely on distributed development to achieve high code quality. However, main-taining high quality requires extensive code review processes, which are unreliable and challenging to scale [9, 10] are com-plex and require extensive domain knowledge. The Linux kernel community uses various tools to enhance code robustness. For example, static analysis tools [14,37,39] are used to identify semantic issues and specific bug patterns. Additionally, dynamic tools, such as fuzzers [15 –18, 42, 49] and other automated testing tools [25,31], are executed around the clock to detect a range of runtime errors in Linux. Al-though these tools are useful, there are classes of problems they cannot easily check, especially in a very dynamic code-base. This includes providing feedback on design trade-offs and choices, identifying complex bugs caused by subtleties of the complex kernel API, and addressing non-compliance with code conventions. As a result, during the patch review, developers still have to do a lot of the work, requiring man-ual effort that could have been used in other tasks, creating development bottlenecks, and making the process difficult to scale. Our analysis (§2.2) shows that only 7.3% of reviews are based on tool checks, whereas 92 .7% of the reviews are from developers’ manual analysis. The non-scalable patch review process has recently emerged as a major bottleneck in the Linux development [9]. Recently, the gap between the growth of patch proposals and the number of developers available to review them has become a problem. Our analysis of the Linux’s memory management, a core and the most active Linux subsystem, is illustrative of the severity of this problem. Over the past 10 years, the number of emails exchanged in the memory management subsystem list has increased steadily from 17,108 in 2015 to 49,855 in 2025, as shown in Figure 1. This activity led to impressive advances in the kernel – the memory manage-ment subsystem now achieves much higher scalability and performance while also supporting a wide range of new fea-tures that handle application needs. However, this also made the memory management subsystem grow by more than 5 times, leading to the adoption of new and complex system designs. In fact, the review period – from patch proposal to completion – often exceeds one year [9]. This lengthy review 1    

> arXiv:2603.24825v1 [cs.SE] 25 Mar 2026 2016 2018 2020 2022 2024
> Year
> 20k
> 30k
> 40k
> 50k
> Total Count  Total Emails

Figure 1: Emails exchanged in the Linux memory manage-ment mailing list from 2015 to November 2025. process is largely due to the complex modifications involved in many patch proposals and limited expertise for reviewing them [1,9,10]. Moreover, it was found that the patches, which were merged before kernel version 5.8, introduced more bugs than were fixed, leading to the introduction of poor quality code, degrading the kernel [6, 8]. To improve the reliability and effectiveness of the review process, some works [7,19,40] have used large language mod-els (LLMs) to identify bug patterns in past data and systemat-ically apply these patterns to detect bugs in new codebases or patches. However, these approaches either have an approxi-mately 50% false positive rate of reporting bugs [7], detect simple bugs on less mature subsystems like drivers [48], or require human effort [40] to annotate the feedback for fine-tuning or training the model to keep pace with software up-dates. As a result, there is a critical need for scalable patch review tools capable of identifying the conventional, complex, and high-priority errors that human reviewers target. To address this need, this paper analyzes the root causes of the patch review process inefficiency by analyzing data from the past 10 years in the Linux Kernel Mailing List (LKML). Our study reveals that, despite the community’s efforts to maintain a steady pace in reviewing the volume of patch pro-posals submitted to the LKML, 73.87% of them have not been reviewed in the past 10 years. We estimate that approximately 21.5% of patches require maintenance work, such as merging them into the source tree. Additionally, 92.7% of the review feedback comes from human reviewers, and 51.8% of that feedback pertains to design and style aspects, including imple-mentation decisions, coding style, and documentation. This suggests a critical need for an automatic and reliable patch validation system that can support the kernel. This paper introduces FLINT, a rule-based, interpretable, LLM-modularized patch validation system. FLINT does not require training or fine-tuning the model and uses an attached rule set that can be collected automatically. FLINT aims to provide an automated system that triage the majority of issues and offers actionable and interpretable feedback for developers to fix them. Ultimately, our goal is not to replace maintainers, but instead to provide a useful signal to develop-ers proposing patches that can relieve the significant workload kernel maintainers face, and the patch proposals are still vali-dated by a human before acceptance. Given a developer discussion, FLINT automatically an-alyzes the discussion and summarizes the critical concepts discussed into rules. These rules provide reliable and consis-tent content that leverages the powerful reasoning capabilities of LLMs while minimizing the risk of LLM hallucination, resulting in a reduced false positive rate. Moreover, FLINT provides bug reports with the rules used and their provenance to maintain interpretability, keeping the developer in control of the process. FLINT uses these rules and the kernel source code to validate patch quality from various perspectives. This includes detecting issues related to function naming, code con-ventions, and race conditions, capabilities that remain difficult for traditional tools to match. Two main challenges need to be addressed to implement and evaluate FLINT. First, how to design the consolidated rule set to provide the comprehensive concepts from the large number of past discussions while maintaining the LLM perfor-mance. Specifically, a previous study [22] shows that a larger size of the context window can affect the LLM performance significantly. FLINT solves this problem by processing past discussions in multiple stages to extract the concept. When-ever FLINT extracts the rules from a single discussion thread, FLINT generates raw rules and applies a filtering process to remove duplicates and non-substantive rules. After filter-ing, FLINT categorizes the rules into two types, code logic and code convention, to have a more fine-grained dataset that can continually improve quality. Then, FLINT will merge the new rules into the existing rule set with some conditions to preserve detailed information while reducing the context window size. The second challenge is to measure the accuracy and qual-ity of issues reported by FLINT in real-world scenarios. Tra-ditional machine learning metrics, such as F1 score and recall, are inapplicable due to the lack of an established ground truth. The reported issues fall into three types: the fixed bugs, undiscovered bugs, and non-bugs. However, because the space of potential candidates, including false negatives in fixed and undiscovered bugs, as well as true negatives in non-bugs, is effectively infinite, it is impossible to enu-merate all the possibilities for classification. To address this problem, we propose a Ground-truth Coverage Score (GCS), which references the metrics from reinforcement learning rewards [21, 23, 26, 50, 51, 53]. First, GCS instructs a tar-get system, such as FLINT, to generate the issues based on the specific buggy patch. Second, GCS employs the LLM-based verifier [5, 28, 43, 52] using Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning [45] to quantify the extent to which the generated issues cover the concepts in the ground truth, bug-fix patch. To avoid hallucination, GCS uses majority voting [44] and best-of-N [3, 5] to avoid the inconsistent LLM behavior. Our evaluation shows that our CoT-verifiers can achieve close to human performance in judging issues that are close to the ground truth. The evaluation also shows the performance 2benefits of FLINT for the multiple-stage rule and issue gener-ation with several benchmarks. FLINT can identify complex bugs, such as data races, fragmented locking, and deadlocks. Moreover, FLINT detects 2 new issues in Linux v6.18 devel-opment cycle, and 7 issues in past versions. FLINT improves ground truth coverage by 21% over the baseline with LLM only. FLINT provides consistent issues, and performs 1.6 times lower false positive rate than the baseline. In summary, this paper makes the following contributions: (1) a quantitative analysis of Linux’s memory management subsystem patch review process (2) the design and implemen-tation of FLINT, a first patch validation system for Linux; and (3) a comprehensive metric framework of the patch validation system. 

# 2 Motivation 

In this section, we analyze the past 10 years of patch reviews for Linux on the Linux Kernel Mailing List (LKML) to iden-tify the challenges associated with the existing tools. First, we explain how we selected the dataset. Next, we discuss the analysis of Linux code reviews and evaluate the benefits and drawbacks of existing approaches to patch validation. 

# 2.1 Methodology of Study 

Thread Selection. We select the memory management sub-system from the LKML as the data source, as it is one of the core, mature subsystem in Linux with substantial developer participation. Moreover, the memory management subsystem often intersects with several crucial system topics, resulting in other subsystems, such as the file system, driver, and hard-ware, frequently submitting their patches to this subsystem. Therefore, using the memory management subsystem as the source ensures broad coverage of kernel activities while main-taining a manageable workload for analysis. We collected patch discussion threads over the past 10 years, from 2015 to November 2025. The trend in total email volume is shown in Figure 1. 

Random Sampling. The memory management subsystem contains 386 , 535 messages over the past 10 years. Given this scale, a detailed manual analysis of the entire dataset is infea-sible. Therefore, we generated a randomized list of message IDs for each year to conduct a manual analysis. We then iter-ated through these randomized lists to draw a representative sample. 

# 2.2 10 Years Patch Review Analysis 

Unreviewed Patches. To determine whether the review work-load of developers and maintainers can handle the increased throughput of the emails in the mailing list, we analyze the percentage of patches that have not received any replies un-til November 2025. We randomly sampled 100 discussion threads for each year. As shown in Figure 2, the percentage of patches without any replies has consistently exceeded 50% throughout 10 years in our dataset. This suggests that, despite 2015 

> 2016
> 2017
> 2018
> 2019
> 2020
> 2021
> 2022
> 2023
> 2024
> 2025*
> Year
> 500
> 1000
> 1500
> 2000
> 2500
> Number of Patches
> 59.32%
> 71.45%
> 63.74%
> 71.00%
> 58.07%
> 76.60%
> 85.45%
> 71.25%
> 66.04%
> 60.53%
> 55.29%
> #patches
> #patches w/o reply

Figure 2: Number of patches and without any reply in the mail-ing list of the memory management subsystem from 2015 to Nov 2025, with random sampling of the 100 threads for each year. The number in the figure for each year is the percentage of the patches without any reply. an increase in the volume of emails and patches submitted to the mailing list, both maintainers and developers have in-tensified their efforts in code review over the past decade. However, the workload associated with code reviews has not been adequate to handle the large number of patches submit-ted. 

Finding: Over the past 10 years, the percentage of patches without any replies has consistently exceeded 50% . This indicates that the code review process is fun-damentally unscalable. 

Implication: The inherent scalability limits of patch review necessitate the adoption of automated tooling to assist developers in prioritizing and triaging the over-whelming volume of incoming contributions. 

Type of Review Feedback. To further understand where de-velopers and maintainers spend most time reviewing, we ex-amine the reply emails in the patch series. We randomly sampled 20 reply emails for each year. First, we manually cat-egorize the reply email into three major categories: (1) static tools [14, 37, 39], like GCC static analysis and kernel static analysis tools; (2) dynamic tools [17, 18, 25], such as fuzzer and runtime testing; (3) and human, such as kernel developers and maintainers. Second, we break down the human category into four subtypes, design, security, style, and others, to inves-tigate what kind of feedback is most frequently provided by the reviewers. The design type includes content that primarily discusses decisions regarding the logic and design of imple-mentations, such as tradeoffs and corner cases. The security type contains the content that mainly discusses the bug or security concerns. The style type covers the feedback related to documentation, coding conventions, such as function types, and coding style. We classify the rest of the reply emails as 32015 

> 2016
> 2017
> 2018
> 2019
> 2020
> 2021
> 2022
> 2023
> 2024
> 2025*
> Year
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> Count
> human - security
> human - others
> human - design
> static tools
> human - style
> dynamic tools

Figure 3: Distribution of the feedback came from. The dataset is a random sampling of 20 reply emails for each year. others if the email only contains feedback related to signatures and email communications, such as CCing someone who was missed or casual comments unrelated to the patches. Finally, if one reply email has more than one type, we choose the most dominant type, defined as the primary focus or most important aspect of the discussion. For example, if a reviewer mentions variable naming and design choice simultaneously [11], we categorize this email response within the design category. As shown in Figure 3, the human feedback dominates the review process ( 92 .7% ), while the tools only contribute to a minority of code reviews ( 7.3% ). In the human category, excluding the other type ( 32 .7% ), design feedback is the most prevalent ( 40 .0% ), followed by style ( 11 .8% ) and se-curity ( 8.2% ). This design feedback often involves specific knowledge of the subsystem. For example, one reply clari-fies that smp_mb__after_atomic() can only be used with the read-modify-write (RMW) atomic operations rather than non-RMW atomic operations, e.g., atomic_read() , should use smp_mb() or other primitives. 

Finding: Human experts carry the primary burden of the review process ( 60% ), primarily addressing complex design flaws (40%) rather than simple stylistic errors. 

Implication: Current automation is insufficient because it targets low-level compliance. To meaningfully reduce reviewer load, tools must evolve to understand domain-specific semantics and architectural logic. 

# 2.3 Patch Review Analysis 

We conduct a thorough analysis of the workload details to identify the specific types of challenges that kernel developers face. We focus on the 2024 dataset, the most recent and most active period from the past 10 years, providing a comprehen-sive overview of the developers’ workload throughout the year. We also perform an automated analysis of data from 2022 and 2023, but the results do not show significant changes from 2024.         

> Total
> Threads 228 Emails 5,717 Replies 3,950 Patches 1,633
> Perc.
> Patches requiring maintenance 21.5% Patches without review 53.2% Patches with maintainer review 23.2% Maintainer email reply rate 36.4%

Table 1: LKML 2024 sampled dataset properties. 

Patch Thread Selection. We randomly sample 20 threads from each month in 2024, removing duplicates to avoid double-counting threads that span across consecutive months. As shown in Table 1, our dataset consists of 5, 717 emails from 228 threads. 1, 633 of these emails are patch propos-als submitted for reviews, 3, 950 are emails replied to them, and the rest are emails unrelated to patch reviews, such as conference proposals. 

Patch Thread Property. We analyze the basic properties of each patch thread to understand how much effort developers and maintainers spend on code review. First, in terms of re-sponse latency, the results show that 69 .7% of threads receive an initial reply within 5 hours, and 35 .1% within just 2 hours. However, the length of the discussion remains long. Among threads that receive a response, the median length is nearly 11 replies. This shows that while the memory management com-munity is responsive, the review process demands substantial and sustained effort from developers and maintainers. 

Maintenance Work. We manually analyze the tasks that are exclusive to maintainers, the work that cannot be distributed to non-maintainer developers, who are the vast majority of the re-viewers. This work includes tasks such as maintaining patches and the source tree, like merging and dropping patches. The results show that only 21 .5% of the patches require main-tenance work. This suggests that most of the maintainers’ workload does not primarily stem from maintenance tasks. 

Patch Response. We analyze the number of patch propos-als that remain unreviewed and determine how many emails receive responses from maintainers. This helps us to under-stand if the current code review process adequately covers all patch proposals and whether maintainers are engaging with the emails. We find that there are 53 .2% patch proposals that have not been reviewed, and maintainers responded to only 23.2% of the total patch proposals. Moreover, we found that the code review workload is significantly unbalanced among maintainers. Although the maintainer email reply rate, i.e., the percentage of total reply emails sent by maintainers, is 36.4%, impressively, a single maintainer is responsible for 13.7% of these responses. One of the potential reasons [9] is that most developers are not confident enough to review complex patch proposals, specifically, those outside of their comfort zone. 

Finding: While the community is highly responsive 4Past Discussion Threads  

> 2. Rule Substantive Filter
> 1. Extracting Concepts
> 3. Rule Categorizer
> Issues
> 3. Patch Analysis Raw Issues
> 1. Src Retriever
> 4. Batched Issues Filter
> 2. Rule Retriever
> Rules
> Patch Set
> Related Source Code
> 4. Rule Merging
> Multiple-Stage Rule Generation Multiple-Stage Patch Validation
> Mailing List

Figure 4: System Overview. ( 69 .7% of replies are sent in less than 5 hours) and ad-ministrative overhead is low ( 21 .5% ), over 53 .2% of patch proposals remain without a review, and the work-load is heavily skewed toward a few experts. 

Implication: The bottleneck of patch review is the lack of experts. The current reliance on a few maintainers to sustain deep technical discussions is insufficient to cover the volume of complex patch proposals, demanding tools that augment reviewer capacity. 

# 2.4 Towards Scaling Linux Development 

Although there are several tools available to find bugs and formatting issues (§6), Linux is highly dynamic, and the ex-isting tools are not able to detect the issues found in the vast majority of patch proposals. Many existing tools rely on static analysis with high false positives, require version-specific ker-nel annotations, or ultimately have a narrow scope of checks. The need to accommodate the dramatic and ongoing increase in the workload of Linux maintainers motivates us to explore automated techniques that can address an exceptionally large, complex, and dynamic codebase. 

# 3 Design 

This section discusses the design of FLINT and shows how to achieve summarization of the past discussion threads to create reliable rules, use the rules to analyze the patch proposal, and report the issues while reducing the false positives of issues. We first explain the FLINT system model. Then, we present the multiple-stage rule extraction and how we extract the important information from past discussions and synthesize the rules. Next, we discuss how the multiple-stage patch validation in FLINT works to synthesize the reliable issues. 

# 3.1 System Model 

Figure 4 shows the system model of FLINT. FLINT extracts the concepts from past discussion threads through multiple stages to summarize into rules. These stages ensure a broad coverage of the concepts while distilling the important in-formation, fitting within the LLM context window, and then 

Example Rule 

Content: In critical kernel paths that must guarantee for-ward progress, such as I/O, memory reclamation, or filesys-tem writeback, do not introduce potentially failing memory allocations without implementing a robust fallback mecha-nism. Instead of causing a hard failure or panic, the system must be able to continue operating, for instance by using pre-allocated resource pools, limiting I/O depth, or using reserves. 

Sources 

- message-id: <source of the message ID> - author: <the author of source> 

History 

- <previous rule content> - <previous rule content> 

Figure 5: A simplified rule generated by FLINT. summarizing discussions on similar topics into individual rules. After generating the rule set from past developer discus-sions, FLINT validates the patch proposal that includes the cover letter, the commit message and the code, in incoming patches using the rule set. FLINT uses multiple stages of val-idation to retrieve relevant rules and source code, synthesize the issues, and filter out the false issues. 

Multiple-Stage Processing. FLINT processes data in mul-tiple stages for both rule generation and patch validation to decompose a complicated task into a set of simplified tasks. This allows LLMs to focus on one specific goal, ensuring high performance [4]. Furthermore, this approach reduces the size of the LLM context window, mitigating the performance degradation often caused by excessive context length [22]. 

# 3.2 Rule Generation 

In this section, we discuss the multi-staged pipeline in FLINT for transforming past discussions into a consolidated rule set. We first describe how FLINT extracts key concepts from the discussion threads. Next, we explain the mechanism for filtering invalid and redundant rules. Finally, we present our strategy for managing the dataset size without losing detailed information. An example of a rule is shown in Figure 5. 

1. Extracting Concepts. FLINT extracts key concepts about the patch reviews from the interaction between developers and maintainers. The interactions contain the vital information that might not be present in existing documentation. Specif-ically, this information does not appear in the source code or the Git commit history, as it is only discussed during the code review stage. We summarize these concepts into a set of rules while also keeping a record of the patch emails for each rule, as the source for the rules might be lost when com-pressing rules on the concepts. This is necessary to ensure that the issues reported by our system are reliable and can be 5traced back to specific old patches from where the rules were generated. 

2. Filtering Invalid and Redundant Rules. After extracting the concept and generating the rules, FLINT filters out the non-substantive content. Examples of non-substantive content are vague principles (e.g., use allocator to allocate memory), redundancy (e.g., fix this bug in the next version), and overlap-ping rules from the same context, as well as communication conventions. Furthermore, to evaluate the effectiveness of the filter, we randomly sampled 50 rules from the rule set and manually reviewed each one using the following standard: a rule should only guide developers on how to use a specific feature to implement a particular function. We exclude any rule that does not meet this standard. As shown in Table 2, the filtering stage reduced the number of rules by 1.7 times, while achieving a false negative rate of 2% for invalid rules. 

3. Categorizing Rules. As we continually generate and col-lect more rules, the rule set could quickly become so large that it cannot even fit into the LLM’s context window when performing patch validation (§3.3). To solve this problem, FLINT reduces the size of the rule set by merging rules based on their topic. Therefore, FLINT follows the conventional hu-man feedback (§2.3), categorizing rules into two types: code logic and convention rules, to allow more precise merging. Code logic concerns system design and security issues, while convention relates to coding style, patch and commit message format, and documentation. 

4. Consolidating Rules In this stage, we first create a meta rule that covers the same topic of rules, reducing the number of redundant concepts in the rule set. We use this method to reduce the number of rules by 15 .7 times, from 3035 rules to 193 , generated from 177 discussion threads. However, this approach can lead to a loss of detailed information if we simply combine the duplicated rules by using LLMs. Our observations reveal that LLMs may unintentionally merge two different topics of rules when there is only a slight overlap between them. For example, if one rule addresses control-group concurrency concerns and another discusses memory barriers, LLMs might merge these two rules and overlook the specific details related to one of them. This occurs because LLMs mistakenly assume that the memory barrier concept is adequately covered within the other concept, which, in reality, it is not. To avoid information loss, rather than just merging dupli-cated rules, we tailor the prompts to ensure that only rules on the same topic are merged, making LLMs to preserve all relevant details. However, even with the prompt restrictions in place, LLMs may still experience some loss of information. To address this, we introduce a diversity level for each rule, which indicates how often the rule has been referenced in past discussions. This metric is based on the number of developers (authors) and discussion threads involved. As shown in Equa-tion 1, we quantify the diversity of contributions. The formula 

Example Issue   

> Title: Race condition when accessing per-cpu data in pre-emptible context
> static int zswap_frontswap_store(...) { struct crypto_acomp_ctx *acomp_ctx; ... acomp_ctx = raw_cpu_ptr(...); mutex_lock(acomp_ctx->mutex); dst = acomp_ctx->dstmem; ... }
> > message-id: <current patch message-ID>
> Issue Content
> The patch uses ‘raw_cpu_ptr()‘ to obtain a pointer to the per-cpu ‘acomp_ctx‘ in a preemptible context and then locks a mutex contained within that context. A race condition exists between the ‘raw_cpu_ptr()‘ call and the subsequent ‘mu-tex_lock()‘. If the task is preempted and migrates to a differ-ent CPU in this window, ‘acomp_ctx‘ will be a stale pointer to the per-cpu data of the original CPU. The task would then proceed to lock the wrong mutex and use the wrong ‘dst-mem‘, leading to data corruption and incorrect synchroniza-tion. This same issue exists in ‘zswap_frontswap_load()‘ and ‘zswap_writeback_entry()‘.
> Rules Used
> •To prevent race conditions from acting on stale state, perform critical checks immediately before the action is taken. If an initial check was performed without a lock, the state must be re-verified under a proper lock before executing the action. Specifically, do not attempt to secure a reference to a kernel object based on an arbitrary address without re-validation, as a race can occur where the memory is freed and reallocated before the reference is taken. > - message-id: <source of the rule> > - Author: <the author of source>

Figure 6: A simplified report from about a race condition [2, 38] reported by FLINT. calculates the geometric mean of the number of unique au-thors, “ nr_author ”, and the number of threads, “ nr_msgid ”, representing the equal balance between two factors with dis-cussion volume. This ensures that both factors influence the overall diversity score. Subsequently, we scale the factor of 10 to map the geometric mean to a human-readable integer range and set the threshold at 30 to merge rules with lower diversity levels. We use this alternative approach to achieve almost 3 times smaller rule set, while effectively preventing any loss of information. 6Stage Rule Category Numbers 1. Extraction 5211        

> 2. Filter 3003
> 3. Categorization Logic 1825 Convention 1178
> 4. Consolidation Logic 592 Convention 437

Table 2: Number of rules after each rule generation stage. 1: struct page { 2: /* Atomic flags, some possibly updated asynchronously */      

> 3: unsigned long flags; 4: /* ... */
> 5: };

Figure 7: An example of comments providing more details. 

diversity _level = pnr _authors × nr _msgid × 10 (1) 

# 3.3 Patch Validation 

FLINT uses the collected rules from §3.2 to validate the incoming patch proposals. In this section, we discuss how FLINT uses the rules generated to validate issues, provide the reliable source for each issue, and reduce the false issues. 

1. Retrieve Relevant Source Code In this stage, FLINT parses the patch content to identify the relevant source code symbols, such as functions and variable types. By using these symbols, FLINT then locates the function call paths and the definition of variable types, and uses this information, like comments, to provide a clear logic and detailed implementa-tion to the LLM, which helps prevent misleading judgments caused by insufficient information. For example, as shown in Figure 7, if the LLM receives a patch proposal that only has partial access to page->flags , it is likely to overlook the data race issue in this situation due to the lack of detailed information. 

2. Retrieve Validation-related Rules In this stage, FLINT focuses on retrieving the relevant rules to validate patches. First, FLINT instructs the LLM to analyze the patch con-tent and summarize the changes. Next, FLINT examines the source code and iterates through the rule set to prioritize the rules, ranking them from most to least relevant to the patch content. 

3. Issue Generation. After FLINT collects the rules and relevant source code, FLINT calls the LLM to review each patch proposal individually, focusing on identifying potential issues within the patch. 

4. Batch and Filter. After the initial review, FLINT batches all the identified issues and filters out possible false positives by analyzing the entire patch set, thereby reducing the number of false alarms. This is because Linux development typically follows a step-by-step approach that begins by creating a function prototype and progresses to detailed implementation. This process aims to transform abstract concepts into specific implementations while minimizing the impact on other sub-systems and preventing crashes when individual patches are merged. Therefore, the issue identified in the first patch may be resolved in a later patch, indicating a false report. 

Example. Figure 6 shows an example report from FLINT when validating the code in a patch proposal [38], which has a race condition bug [2], and provides the issues. This example shows that FLINT can point out the exact bugs, even complex and real-world ones, while also showing the rules used and the references from which the rules were extracted. This allows developers to easily verify the basis of the report. 

# 4 Scalable Validation of System Result 

In the field of machine learning, researchers typically rely on established benchmarks [27,35] to evaluate various ML-based tools. These benchmarks provide a standardized framework for assessment, enabling comparisons across different sys-tems using widely accepted evaluation metrics like precision, F1 score, and recall. However, a notable gap in the current lit-erature is the absence of studies specifically addressing Linux patch validation. Unlike deterministic testing [12, 30, 52], patch validation systems can generate an unbounded number of potential issues. This creates a problem space that is im-possible to enumerate or fully capture within a single, finite benchmark, as discussed in §1. Furthermore, manually ver-ifying each reported issue is prohibitively time-consuming, resulting in traditional human-in-the-loop evaluation being unscalable. Thus, this area requires focused investigation, par-ticularly on developing scalable, reliable, and reproducible validation techniques that minimize human intervention. Such advancements could significantly enhance the reliability and efficiency of ML-based methods, which are integral to various ML applications. Evaluating such a system is crucial to help users calibrate the system, in particular, choose the LLM model that best performs within the budget available. This is important as models vary widely in capability and cost. Human reviewing [19, 40] does not scale and is subjec-tive and prone to inconsistencies. Moreover, verifying that the generated issues requires domain-specific knowledge and is challenging and time-consuming, particularly given the unbounded nature of issue discovery. To address the evaluation problem, this paper proposes a Ground-truth Coverage Score (GCS). This metric measures how well generated issues align with the ground-truth of Linux bug-fix commit messages using past discussions. It is important to note that the goal of mechanisms is not to re-place the developer validation during deployment, ultimately patch proposals need to be validated by developers. Instead, the goal is to provide an aggregate approximation of the cor-7rectness of the system. As we discuss in §5.4, we ultimately confirm the effectiveness of GCS using a manual approach, allowing us to compare the effectiveness of FLINT across a vast space of configuration scenarios. Under the hood, GCS combines rubric-based rewards [21], LLM-as-a-judge [50, 52], and a Chain-of-Thought [45] (CoT) verifier [5, 28, 43]. 

# 4.1 Ground-truth Coverage Score (GCS) 

Ground-truth Coverage Score (GCS) implements a backtest-ing strategy to measure the true positives using past issues found in the kernel code. False positives are inherently harder to measure automatically, thus we measured them manually in our methodology §3.3. In practice, GCS measures the per-formance of the patch validation system by estimating the ground truth coverage of the issues fixed. 

Preliminaries. We assume a dataset composed of pairs of patches that were later found to be buggy ( Pb) with their respective patch fixes ( Pf ). In practice, we use the recent discussions among developers to gather this dataset (§5.2). A buggy patch ( Pb) introduces a subsequently fixed prob-lem [38], while the bug-fix patch ( Pf ) fixes the corresponding issue [2]. We treat the bug-fix patch ( Pf ) from this dataset as the ground truth ( GT ), given that we aim to automate the existing process. Finally, we define “system” as the candidate that will generate a set of issues for each Pb, such as FLINT and baseline: 

I = {ix}|I| 

> x=1

= system (P), for P ∈ { Pb, Pf } (2) Later, we utilize a Chain-of-Thought [45] (CoT) reasoning model [50, 52] as the verifier [5, 28, 43] for the following judgment framework. We leverage this model’s advanced reasoning capability to evaluate the validity of each issue. 

Evaluation Criteria. For each issue, ix, we use a judg-ment framework with Pf to generate the issue-specific cri-terion [21], denoted as CP . Our framework for evaluation consists of four criteria, where CP = ( ci)4

> i=1

, to pose ques-tions for issue that align with the various properties of the ground truth, Pf :1. Root Cause : Formulate a question about the specific root cause you identified. For example, does the issue describe a problem caused by a race condition between “function_A” and “function_B”? 2. Code Location : Formulate a question about the change surface. For example, does the issue point to code within the patch’s change surface, specifically mentioning files like “file.c” or functions like “function_name”? 3. Fixing Strategy : Formulate a question about the patch’s solution. This is different from the root cause. For ex-ample, does the issue suggest a solution that involves “adding a lock”, “checking a variable before use”, or a similar strategy implemented in the patch? 4. Keyword or Concept Overlap : Formulate a question about unique technical terms or concepts from the com-mit message. For example, does the issue discuss con-cepts central to the patch description, such as “a specific memory barrier type”, “the I/O memory management unit (IOMMU)”, or “a particular scheduler policy”? 

Weighted Confidence Score (WCS). To quantify the cri-teria, the framework uses a CoT-verifier that computes a score for every criterion c j on a specific issue, ix, as shown in Equation 3. This metric integrates the "Yes/No" re-sponse with a self-confidence score [44]. In the formula, 

b(Pf ,k,n) 

> j

(ix) ∈ { 0, 1} is a binary correctness function that indi-cates whether the response "Yes" satisfies the criterion given in the prompt. And, c(Pf ,k,n) 

> j

(ix) ∈ [1, 100 ] is a self-reported confidence score [44] from the CoT-verifier. The framework computes a weighted confidence score based on the positive probability, normalizing the final value to the range [0, 1] to derive the issue’s overall score. WCS (Pf ,k,n) 

> j

(ix) = 1100 c(Pf ,k,n) 

> j

(ix) · b(Pf ,k,n) 

> j

(ix) (3) Then, the framework uses the four criteria with WCS. And, the overall output of CoT-verifier, the CoT-verification ratio-nale, will be the score of the system, which we will discuss further for the consistency of the judgment. Equation 4 shows the entire equation. Additionally, Figure 8 shows an example of judgment. CoT-verifier (k,n)(I, Pf ) = 1

|I|

> |I|

# ∑

> x=1

1

|CP |

> |CP |

# ∑

> j=1

WCS (Pf ,k,n) 

> j

(ix)

!

(4) 

Ground-truth Coverage Score (GCS). To reduce the noise from individual reasoning paths and select the most consis-tent answer, we employ majority voting [44, 50]. Specifically, we generate K CoT-verification rationales and aggregate the ‘yes’ verdicts to calculate an average confidence score. This aggregation mitigates the impact of reasoning errors from individual CoT-verifiers. We integrate this voting mechanism into a Best-of-N strategy [3,5], in which N candidate solutions are generated by the LLM, ranked by the aggregated verifi-cation scores, and the top candidate is selected. Furthermore, we denote the k-th verification from majority voting and the 

n-th solution from Best-of-N as (k, n), where 1 ≤ k ≤ K and 1 ≤ n ≤ N.Next, we calculate the overall score for every single issue 

ix by running the Best-of-N ( N), majority voting ( K), and the criterion ( CP ). We call this the Ground-truth Coverage Score (GCS), reflecting the weighted ground-truth coverage [29,52], and define it as follows: 

GCS (system ,N,K)(Pf , Pb) = 

max 

> 1≤n≤N

(

1

K

> K

# ∑

> k=1

CoT-verifier (k,n)(system (Pb), Pf )

) (5) 8Issue Analysis           

> Title: Race condition when accessing per-CPU data in pre-emptible context
> Overall match: Yes
> Confidence score : 95
> Criterion #1 - Root cause:
> •Criterion description: Does the issue describe a race condition between zswap_[de]compress() and CPU hotplug, where migration after getting a per-CPU pointer leads to a use-after-free? •Reason: Yes, the issue describes a race condition where a task migrates after ‘raw_cpu_ptr()‘ and before ‘mutex_lock()‘, leading to incorrect synchronization and data use. This is the precise scenario the patch’s UAF fix is designed to prevent. •Match: Yes •Confidence score: 95
> · · ·

Figure 8: Abbreviated example of an evaluated issue [2, 38] by CoT-verifier. Therefore, we can get the system performance from GCS for a single pair of buggy patch-bug-fix patch. This gives us two key metrics: (1) ground truth performance: GCS GT . (2) candidate system performance: GCS system . The final verifica-tion is the ratio of the candidate’s performance to the ground truth’s performance: FinalScore = GCS (system ,N,K)(Pf , Pb)

GCS (GT ,N,K)(Pf , Pf ) (6) 

Highest Ground-truth Coverage Score (H-GCS). GCS shows the average quality of the issues. To measure the high-est coverage, for each CoT-verification rationale, instead of averaging all the issues’ scores, H-GCS reports the highest one. 

# 5 Evaluation 

This section first discusses the experiment setup (§5.1 and §5.2), and evaluates our system and our methodology along the following questions: • Can our system detect the issue in Linux? (§5.3)? • What is the accuracy of CoT-verifier with GCS (§5.4)? • What is the accuracy of issue from our system (§5.5)? 

# 5.1 Experiment Setup 

Model. We use three open models [24, 41, 47] and two closed models [13] for all the experiments. The models and their knowledge cut-off are listed in Table 3. We           

> Model Knowledge cutoff Thinking
> Gemini-2.5-Pro January, 2025 [13] Dynamic Gemini-2.5-Flash ∗
> Gemma3:4b August, 2024 [41] No Gemma3:12b Qwen3-coder:30b ∗May, 2025 [24, 47] (release date) Yes

Table 3: Information of models in evaluation. We use qwen3-coder:30b-a3b-q4_K_M as Qwen3-coder:30b, and gemini-2.5-flash-preview-09-2025 as Gemini-2.5-Flash in the system. use gemini-2.5-flash-preview-09-2025 as Gemini-2.5-Flash due to the truncated output token problem [20]. How-ever, we still use the stable version of Gemini-2.5-Flash as CoT-verifier. 

Dataset and Knowledge Cut-off. To ensure fairness, we split the dataset based on time and the knowledge cut-off point of the latest model, which is January 1, 2025. The buggy patch and bug-fix patch data collected before January 1, 2025, are used to generate the rule set. The buggy patch and bug-fix patch data after this date are used for the validation dataset to prevent data leakage affecting the evaluation. 

Kernel Source Code. We use Linux v6.15-rc5 since its re-lease date, December 29, 2024, is within the cut-off dates for the models that we use. This allows us to simulate limited information during the review process. 

System Setup. We evaluate FLINT R/S , which uses the rule set and source code, and FLINT LLM , which does not use the rule set (§3.2) or relevant source code (§3.3), in our evaluation. 

CoT-verifier. CoT-verifier needs to be at least as powerful as the system’s model; thus, it can judge the system result most correctly. To satisfy this requirement and reduce costs, we use Gemini-2.5-Pro as CoT-verifier when the system uses Gemini-2.5-Pro and Gemini-2.5-Flash, and a stable version of Gemini-2.5-Flash as CoT-verifier for all the open models. 

# 5.2 Dataset Collection 

We construct the dataset using on our analysis of the memory management subsystem from 2024. This set covers a wide range of topics from the memory management subsystems, such as synchronization, zswap, process address space, migra-tion, and others. In total, this data set includes 177 discussion threads and 3934 reply emails. We use Gemini-2.5-Pro during the rule collection. Moreover, we use 21 buggy and bug-fix patch pairs as a validation dataset. 

Extracting Rules. FLINT R/S extracts 1029 rules. Figure 9 shows number of rules across stages as FLINT R/S progres-sively analyzes the 177 discussion threads. First, the repeated concept has a positive correlation with the number of discus-sion threads; as the number of extracted threads increased, 90 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 

> Number of Discussions
> 0
> 500
> 1000
> 1500
> 2000
> CDF of Rules  Code Logic
> Code Convention
> Filtered
> Merged

Figure 9: Filtered, merged, and collected code logic and con-vention rules as threads are progressively analyzed. the merged rule also increased. Second, we notice that for each thread, the number of rules has a positive correlation with the number of reply emails. In most of the cases, for the discussions with substantial interactions, the filtered rules have also increased. 

# 5.3 Issues Found in Linux 

We run FLINT R/S on the LKML to assess the effectiveness of detecting previously unreported issues. In the v6.18 devel-opment cycle, FLINT R/S detects 2 new issues in the v6.18 Linux development, and 7 issues in previous versions. One of the two new issues identified is a coding convention violation regarding inconsistent function naming. In particu-lar, FLINT R/S detects an inconsistency in a patch proposal that introduced a new feature by adding functions to an ex-isting API family. While this issue negatively impacts main-tainability and readability, it is notoriously difficult for tradi-tional tools to detect. We reported this issue to the developer, and they confirmed it. Detecting such issues demonstrates FLINT R/S ’s capability to assist developers in patch reviews. The second new issue involves variable misuse within the newly introduced code. As the introduced code is a minor part of the code in Linux, traditional tools can detect this type of issue, but require significant additional computational re-sources to do so. This issue has been reported by the reviewer and confirmed by the developer. The other 7 issues are either the design choice, race con-dition, the inconsistent return type with the comment, or the inconsistency of the commit message description with the implementation. 

# 5.4 CoT-verifier Accuracy 

To evaluate the accuracy of the CoT-verifier’s judgments, we conduct a manual review of each criterion associated with any identified issues. We sample 10 data points for each true or false criterion result from the CoT-verifier and manually analyze the data. In total, we review 80 criterion results for both the Gemini-2.5-Pro and Gemini-2.5-Flash CoT-verifiers. To evaluate the CoT-verifier against our ground truth, we calculate standard classification metrics including accuracy, precision, recall, specificity, and F1 score. Additionally, we employ Cohen’s Kappa [34] to quantify inter-rater reliability and account for chance agreement between the LLM-based                              

> Gemini-2.5-Pro Gemini-2.5-Flash Metric Full Set Full Set High Conf.
> (N=80) (N=80) (>90, N=41)
> Cohen’s Kappa 0.925 0.475 0.809
> Precision 0.950 0.500 0.750
> Recall 0.974 0.952 1.000
> F1 Score 0.962 0.658 0.857
> Specificity 0.951 0.661 0.906

Table 4: Performance and inter-rater reliability of the CoT-verifier against human review. The evaluation covers 80 judgments balanced across correctness labels (10 true and 10 false per criterion). We compare Gemini-2.5-Pro (veri-fying Gemini-2.5-Pro) against Gemini-2.5-Flash (verifying Gemma3:4b). Full Set includes all 80 judgments; High Conf. 

refers to the subset where the confidence score is > 90. CoT-verifiers and humans. Table 4 presents these metrics, highlighting the verifier’s performance across different confi-dence thresholds. 

Gemini-2.5-Pro CoT-verifier. The overall agreement accu-racy is 96.25%. The precision, recall, specificity, and F1 score further demonstrate that the CoT-verifier is generally accu-rate. Specifically, out of 80 total cases, there were only 3 instances of disagreement between the CoT-verifier and the reviewer: 2 false positives and 1 false negative relative to the reviewer. Furthermore, Cohen’s Kappa indicates an almost perfect agreement between the CoT-verifier and human re-viewers, with a value of κ = 0.925 and a 95% confidence interval of [0.842 , 1.000 ].

Gemini-2.5-Flash CoT-verifier. The overall agreement ac-curacy is 73.75%. The metrics in Table 4 show lower ac-curacy than Gemini-2.5-Pro. The confusion matrix shows that Gemini-2.5-Flash has a systematic bias, which has high sensitivity ( 0.95 ) and low precision ( 0.50 ). This discrep-ancy (20 false positives and 1 false negative) suggests that Gemini-2.5-Flash applied a significantly more relaxed thresh-old than Gemini-2.5-Pro. Also, Cohen’s Kappa indicates mod-erate agreement ( κ = 0.475 ), and 95% confidence interval 

[0.282 , 0.668 ], which has the lowest level of agreement with a human reviewer. 

Gemini-2.5-Flash CoT-verifier With High Confidence. To enhance the reliability of Gemini-2.5-Flash on the CoT-verifier, we further analyze the judgments and confidence scores it provides. We investigate the incorrect criterion judg-ments to evaluate the average confidence scores for both in-correct and correct judgments. The average confidence score for incorrect judgments is 80 .24 , while for correct judgments, it is 92 .63 . This indicates that with Gemini-2.5-Flash, if we disregard confidence scores below 90 , we are likely to achieve results that closely align with a human reviewer. Based on this 10 Score GA3:4b GA3:12b Q3C:30b G2.5F G2.5P GCS 0.18 0.35 0.51 0.63 0.65 0.43 0.41 0.47 0.71 0.63          

> H-GCS 0.27 0.40 0.75 0.72 0.67 0.52 0.59 0.78 0.77 0.75

Table 5: The true positives analysis. Overall GCS and H-GCS with Best-of-10 and majority voting, K = 3. FLINT R/S 

is gray color, and FLINT LLM is white color. Gemini-2.5-Pro (G2.5P) and Gemini-2.5-Flash (G2.5F)’s CoT-verifier are Gemini-2.5-Pro, others, Gemma3 (GA3:4b and GA3:12b) and Qwen3-coder:30b (Q3C:30b), CoT-verifier is Gemini-2.5-Flash. Higher is better. observation, we set the threshold of the weighted confidence score to obtain a more accurate score using Gemini-2.5-Flash. Applying a confidence threshold of 90 significantly en-hances the reliability of the lightweight model. Specifi-cally, filtering for high-confidence judgments raises the Co-hen’s Kappa for Gemini-2.5-Flash to substantial agreement (κ = 0.809 ), with a 95% confidence interval of [0.601 , 1.000 ],which is close to almost perfect agreement. This confirms that Gemini-2.5-Flash is capable of high-fidelity verification when the evaluation is restricted to its most confident predictions. In summary, by breaking down judgment into smaller, spe-cific criteria, Gemini-2.5-Pro performs similarly to human judgment. In contrast, while Gemini-2.5-Flash can identify when the results do not align with the ground truth, Gemini-2.5-Flash struggles with accurately assessing when a result is close to the ground truth if the judgment’s confidence score is below 90. However, by filtering out judgments with a confi-dence score below 90, Gemini-2.5-Flash can perform close to human. 

# 5.5 Report Accuracy 

We evaluate the capabilities of FLINT R/S , which reports is-sues based on the rule set, using the GCS metric described in §4.1. We use the validation dataset, where each data point consists of a buggy patch and bug-fix patch pair, and all data points are after January 1, 2025. We run FLINT R/S and FLINT LLM with 5 different models. For the open models, we use Gemini-2.5-Flash as the CoT-verifier, while for the closed models, we use Gemini-2.5-Pro. The bug-fix patch is considered the ground truth in this evaluation. Among the val-idation dataset, only one data point’s ground truth received a score of less than the maximum (1) on the GCS metric, which is buffer overflow. For every data point, we run each model and system 10 times to obtain the Best-of- 10 outcomes using 

K = 3 majority voting. We categorize all the data points into 8 types, coding convention ( style ), uninitialized local vari-able ( ULV ), design choice and implementation error ( design ), performance regression ( perf ), locking issues ( lock ), data race and race condition ( racing ), use-after-free ( UAF ), and buffer overflow ( BOF ), to illustrate the different capabilities style ULV      

> design perf
> lock
> racing UAF
> BOF
> 0.00
> 0.25
> 0.50
> 0.75
> 1.00
> GCS
> FLINT R/S
> FLINT LLM
> (a) GCS of Gemini-2.5-Pro. style ULV
> design perf
> lock
> racing UAF
> BOF
> 0.00
> 0.25
> 0.50
> 0.75
> 1.00
> H-GCS
> (b) H-GCS of Gemini-2.5-Pro.

Figure 10: The true positives analysis. GCS and H-GCS with Best-of-10 and majority voting, K = 3, of Gemini-2.5-Pro. on different bug patterns. 

Ground-truth Coverage Score (GCS). We first evaluate the GCS on both systems to show the average performance across all the issues and trials. A high GCS indicates that the system can consistently identify the ground truth. In other words, the system is able to consistently pinpoint the true bug we specify. As shown in Table 5, FLINT R/S achieves an average improvement 8% with Qwen3-coder:30b and 3% with Gemini-2.5-Pro. However, FLINT R/S does not have the same performance on weaker models, indicating that the stronger reasoning or coding-specific models are more suitable for the patch validation. We further detailed analyze FLINT R/S on each type of is-sue. Figure 10a shows that with the strongest model, Gemini-2.5-Pro FLINT R/S achieves higher scores on lock (21%), racing (14%), perf (4%), and UAF (6%). On the other hand, FLINT LLM performs better on style, design, and buffer over-flow. This difference primarily comes from the rule set used by FLINT R/S , which is collected from unbalanced past discus-sions on concurrency topics. In contrast, FLINT LLM is not re-stricted by the rule set. Therefore, across 10 trials, FLINT LLM 

can generate a more diverse range of issues, allowing it to cover the ground truth more effectively. 

Highest Ground-Truth Coverage Score (H-GCS). We then evaluate the H-GCS to show the peak ground truth cover-age across trials. A high H-GCS indicates that, among all the issues in a trial, the system can accurately pinpoint the specific true bug. As shown in Table 5, FLINT R/S generally underperforms compared to FLINT LLM . This is primarily because FLINT R/S is constrained to reporting the issue only based on the rule set. However, looking into specific types in Figure 10b with Gemini-2.5-Pro, FLINT R/S achieves better 11 System Total TP FP FPR Prec.           

> FLINT R/S 20 13 735% 65% FLINT LLM 20 911 55% 45%

Table 6: False report rate and precision of FLINT R/S versus FLINT LLM with Gemini-2.5-Pro. scores on lock (11%) and UAF (13%). Furthermore, when comparing the GCS and H-GCS for FLINT R/S , we notice minimal differences. In contrast, FLINT LLM shows signifi-cant variation in some types, such as data race, buffer overflow, and design/logic issue. For example, FLINT LLM has a GCS of 0.34 and H-GCS of 1.00 on BOF type with Gemini-2.5-Pro. This difference is because FLINT R/S provides more consis-tent issues across trials based on the reliable rule set, whereas FLINT LLM may experience more hallucinations, leading to a higher false positive rate (Figure 5.5). 

False Positives. In this experiment, we evaluate the false pos-itive rate of FLINT R/S and FLINT LLM . To determine the ground truth for each issue, we manually check to see if a sample of issues reported by our system have been fixed in the recent version 6.18 of the Linux and/or discussed in the LKML. Thus, this is a conservative analysis, as some issues might be true positives but not yet identified by developers. Due to the substantial verification workload involved in an-alyzing each issue, we randomly sampled 20 issues from FLINT R/S and FLINT LLM . Both FLINT R/S and FLINT LLM 

use Gemini-2.5-Pro in this experiment. As shown in Table 6, FLINT R/S has a precision of 65% and a false positive rate of 35%, which is nearly twice as low as that of FLINT LLM , which has a precision of 55%. This indicates that FLINT R/S provides more accurate results with fewer false reports compared to FLINT LLM . Additionally, most of the true positive issues have already been fixed in the most recent version. 

# 6 Related Work 

Automated Code Review. Several works [19, 40] utilize LLMs to conduct code reviews. BitsAI-CR [40] employs a customized fine-tuned LLM to automate patch review, while adopting costly human annotation to collect developer feed-back, creating a flywheel mechanism to continuously improve BitsAI-CR. Sashiko [19] uses an agentic code review system with a set of Linux kernel-specific prompts and protocol to automatically review. In contrast, FLINT utilizes a rule set de-rived from past discussions to sustain and enhance its accuracy without the need for costly fine-tuning, human annotation, or a heavy agentic system. 

Static Analysis. The static analysis tools for Linux, such as Sparse [39] and Smatch [37], use a semantic parser to inspect and report on the abstract syntax tree of a C program with kernel-specific annotation. These tools usually depend on the manual and the specific annotations to reduce the false positive rate [36,37]. In comparison, FLINT has a lower false positive rate and can detect not only semantic errors but also design and coding convention issues. 

LLM-Synthesized Static Analysis. An alternative ap-proach [46, 48] to preventing security vulnerabilities is to use a machine learning-based method to identify similar bug patterns from past data. For example, BugStone [46] employs this technique. BugStone introduces a rule-centric system that analyzes recurring bug patterns from past research to identify similar bugs in source code. Additionally, Knighter [48] uti-lizes LLMs to create a set of static analysis tools for direct analysis of the source code. These LLM-based static analysis tools are close to FLINT but have several differences. First, FLINT aims to find the bug with the fragmented information of the source code. Second, FLINT can detect the design and coding conventions issues in the patch proposals. On the other hand, these LLM-based static analysis tools need the full source code and focus on finding existing logic bugs. 

Testing Tools. The traditional [17, 18, 25] and ML-based testing tools [15,16,42,49] for Linux usually tend to take more than an hour to find the bug, which is not a suitable case for rapid interactive response in Linux development. For example, the Linux Kernel Performance [25] (LKP) only tests specific kernel versions weekly, and Syzbot [17, 18] also focuses on specific kernel versions. This coarse and relatively long-term testing makes it difficult to provide immediate feedback and limits the testing to accepted patches, which does not alleviate the workload associated with patch reviews. 

LLM-Synthesized Testing. Several studies [32, 33] focus on generating test input to validate source code. For example, Cleverest [32] is a feedback-directed, zero-shot LLM-based regression test generation technique that can create test cases for new patches. Additionally, KGym [33] provides a vir-tual environment for testing and patching kernels to detect bugs. These studies are independent and orthogonal to our system, as they aim to perform runtime tests on software. This approach requires more computational resources and is not designed to handle the high throughput of incoming patches in the kernel. 

# 7 Conclusion 

This paper presents a 10 years study of the patch review pro-cess in the Linux memory subsystem. To address the problems identified in the study, this paper introduces a novel approach called FLINT, a rule-based patch validation system. FLINT effectively bridges the gap between the reasoning capabilities of LLMs and the practical constraints of the patch review process. FLINT achieves 1.6× lower false positive rate, and detects 2 issues in the recent Linux version. 

# References 

[1] Iago Abal, Claus Brabrand, and Andrzej Wasowski. 42 variability bugs in the linux kernel: a qualitative analy-12 sis. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Automated Software Engineering , ASE ’14, page 421–432, New York, NY, USA, 2014. Associ-ation for Computing Machinery. [2] Yosry Ahmed. [patch v2] mm: zswap: properly synchro-nize freeing resources during cpu hotunplug, Jan 2025. 

https://lore.kernel.org/all/20250108222441. 3622031-1-yosryahmed@google.com/ .[3] Eugene Charniak and Mark Johnson. Coarse-to-fine n-best parsing and MaxEnt discriminative reranking. In Kevin Knight, Hwee Tou Ng, and Kemal Oflazer, editors, 

Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics (ACL’05) , pages 173–180, Ann Arbor, Michigan, June 2005. Association for Computational Linguistics. [4] Lingjiao Chen, Jared Davis, Boris Hanin, Peter Bailis, Ion Stoica, Matei Zaharia, and James Zou. Are more llm calls all you need? towards the scaling properties of com-pound ai systems. In A. Globerson, L. Mackey, D. Bel-grave, A. Fan, U. Paquet, J. Tomczak, and C. Zhang, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems , volume 37, pages 45767–45790. Curran Asso-ciates, Inc., 2024. [5] Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias Plap-pert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John Schulman. Training veri-fiers to solve math word problems, 2021. [6] Jonathan Corbet. Development statistics for 6.17, 2025. 

https://lwn.net/Articles/1038358/ .[7] Jonathan Corbet. Large language models for patch re-view, 2025. https://lwn.net/Articles/1041694/ .[8] Jonathan Corbet. Some 6.16 development statistics, 2025. https://lwn.net/Articles/1031161/ .[9] Jonathan Corbet. The state of the memory-management development process, 2025 edition, 2025. https:// lwn.net/Articles/1016724/ .[10] Jonathan Corbet and Greg Kroah-Hartman. Linux ker-nel development – how fast it is going, who is do-ing it, what they are doing, and who is sponsoring it, 2016. https://www.linuxfoundation.org/hubfs/ lf_pub_whowriteslinux2016.pdf .[11] Hillf Danton. Re: [patch 01/10] mm/hugetlb: add cache of descriptors to resv_map for re-gion_add, 2015. https://lore.kernel.org/ all/008301d0b547$b62a10e0$227e32a0$@ alibaba-inc.com/ .[12] Xueying Du, Mingwei Liu, Kaixin Wang, Hanlin Wang, Junwei Liu, Yixuan Chen, Jiayi Feng, Chaofeng Sha, Xin Peng, and Yiling Lou. Evaluating large language models in class-level code generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on Soft-ware Engineering , ICSE ’24, New York, NY, USA, 2024. Association for Computing Machinery. [13] Gheorghe Comanici et al. Gemini 2.5: Pushing the frontier with advanced reasoning, multimodality, long context, and next generation agentic capabilities, 2025. [14] Gcc command options: 3.10 options that control static analysis, 2025. https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/ gcc/Static-Analyzer-Options.html .[15] Sishuai Gong, Dinglan Peng, Deniz Altınbüken, Pedro Fonseca, and Petros Maniatis. Snowcat: Efficient kernel concurrency testing using a learned coverage predictor. In Proceedings of the 29th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles , SOSP ’23, page 35–51, New York, NY, USA, 2023. Association for Computing Machinery. [16] Sishuai Gong, Wang Rui, Deniz Altinbüken, Pedro Fon-seca, and Petros Maniatis. Snowplow: Effective Ker-nel Fuzzing with a Learned White-box Test Mutator ,page 1124–1138. Association for Computing Machin-ery, New York, NY, USA, 2025. [17] Google. Syzbot dashboard, 2025. https:// syzkaller.appspot.com/upstream .[18] Google. Syzkaller-kernel fuzzer, 2025. https:// github.com/google/syzkaller .[19] Google. Sashiko - agentic review of linux kernel code changes, 2026. https://github.com/sashiko-dev/ sashiko .[20] Google ai discussion: Truncated re-sponses despite being under limits, 2025. 

https://discuss.ai.google.dev/t/ truncated-responses-despite-being-under-limits/ 87898 .[21] Anisha Gunjal, Anthony Wang, Elaine Lau, Vaskar Nath, Bing Liu, and Sean Hendryx. Rubrics as rewards: Rein-forcement learning beyond verifiable domains, 2025. [22] Kelly Hong, Anton Troynikov, and Jeff Huber. Context rot: How increasing input tokens impacts llm perfor-mance. Technical report, Chroma, July 2025. [23] Zenan Huang, Yihong Zhuang, Guoshan Lu, Zeyu Qin, Haokai Xu, Tianyu Zhao, Ru Peng, Jiaqi Hu, Zhan-ming Shen, Xiaomeng Hu, Xijun Gu, Peiyi Tu, Jiaxin Liu, Wenyu Chen, Yuzhuo Fu, Zhiting Fan, Yanmei Gu, Yuanyuan Wang, Zhengkai Yang, Jianguo Li, and Junbo 13 Zhao. Reinforcement learning with rubric anchors, 2025. [24] Binyuan Hui, Jian Yang, Zeyu Cui, Jiaxi Yang, Dayiheng Liu, Lei Zhang, Tianyu Liu, Jiajun Zhang, Bowen Yu, Kai Dang, et al. Qwen2. 5-coder technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12186 , 2024. [25] Intel - linux kernel performance, 2025. 

https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/ en/developer/topic-technology/open/ linux-kernel-performance/overview.html .[26] Ruipeng Jia, Yunyi Yang, Yongbo Gai, Kai Luo, Shihao Huang, Jianhe Lin, Xiaoxi Jiang, and Guanjun Jiang. Writing-zero: Bridge the gap between non-verifiable tasks and verifiable rewards, 2025. [27] Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik R Narasimhan. SWE-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues? In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. [28] Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee, Jan Leike, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe. Let’s verify step by step. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. [29] Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. Teach-ing models to express their uncertainty in words. Trans-actions on Machine Learning Research , 2022. [30] Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. Truth-fulQA: Measuring how models mimic human false-hoods. In Smaranda Muresan, Preslav Nakov, and Aline Villavicencio, editors, Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-tics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 3214–3252, Dublin, Ireland, May 2022. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. [31] Linux test project, 2025. https://github.com/ linux-test-project/ltp .[32] Jing Liu, Seongmin Lee, Eleonora Losiouk, and Marcel Böhme. Can llm generate regression tests for software commits?, 2025. [33] Alex Mathai, Chenxi Huang, Petros Maniatis, Aleksandr Nogikh, Franjo Ivanˇ ci´ c, Junfeng Yang, and Baishakhi Ray. Kgym: a platform and dataset to benchmark large language models on linux kernel crash resolution. In 

Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS ’24, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2024. Curran Associates Inc. [34] Mary McHugh. Interrater reliability: The kappa statis-tic. Biochemia medica : ˇ casopis Hrvatskoga društva medicinskih biokemiˇ cara / HDMB , 22:276–82, 10 2012. [35] Sujin Park, Mingyu Guan, Xiang Cheng, and Taesoo Kim. Principles and methodologies for serial perfor-mance optimization. In Proceedings of the 19th USENIX Conference on Operating Systems Design and Imple-mentation , OSDI ’25, USA, 2025. USENIX Associa-tion. [36] Gabriel Ryan, Burcu Cetin, Yongwhan Lim, and Suman Jana. Accurate data race prediction in the linux kernel through sparse fourier learning. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. , 8(OOPSLA1), April 2024. [37] Smatch: pluggable static analysis for c, 2025. https: //repo.or.cz/w/smatch.git .[38] Barry Song. [patch v7] mm/zswap: move to use crypto_acomp api for hardware acceleration, Nov, 2020. 

https://lore.kernel.org/all/20201107065332. 26992-1-song.bao.hua@hisilicon.com/ .[39] Sparse documentation, 2025. https://sparse.docs. kernel.org/en/latest/ .[40] Tao Sun, Jian Xu, Yuanpeng Li, Zhao Yan, Ge Zhang, Lintao Xie, Lu Geng, Zheng Wang, Yueyan Chen, Qin Lin, Wenbo Duan, Kaixin Sui, and Yuanshuo Zhu. Bitsai-cr: Automated code review via llm in practice. In 

Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on the Foundations of Software Engineering , FSE Com-panion ’25, page 274–285, New York, NY, USA, 2025. Association for Computing Machinery. [41] Gemma Team and Aishwarya Kamath et al. Gemma 3 technical report, 2025. [42] Daimeng Wang, Zheng Zhang, Hang Zhang, Zhiyun Qian, Srikanth V. Krishnamurthy, and Nael Abu-Ghazaleh. SyzVegas: Beating kernel fuzzing odds with reinforcement learning. In 30th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 21) , pages 2741–2758. USENIX Association, August 2021. [43] Peiyi Wang, Lei Li, Zhihong Shao, Runxin Xu, Damai Dai, Yifei Li, Deli Chen, Yu Wu, and Zhifang Sui. Math-shepherd: Verify and reinforce LLMs step-by-step with-out human annotations. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar, editors, Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 9426–9439, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. 14 [44] Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V Le, Ed H. Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations ,2023. [45] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi, Quoc V. Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems , NIPS ’22, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2022. Curran Associates Inc. [46] Qiushi Wu, Yue Xiao, Dhilung Kirat, Kevin Eykholt, Jiy-ong Jang, and Douglas Lee Schales. One bug, hundreds behind: Llms for large-scale bug discovery, 2025. [47] An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chen-gen Huang, Chenxu Lv, Chujie Zheng, Dayiheng Liu, Fan Zhou, Fei Huang, Feng Hu, Hao Ge, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jialong Tang, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jian-wei Zhang, Jianxin Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jing Zhou, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keqin Bao, Kexin Yang, Le Yu, Lianghao Deng, Mei Li, Mingfeng Xue, Mingze Li, Pei Zhang, Peng Wang, Qin Zhu, Rui Men, Ruize Gao, Shixuan Liu, Shuang Luo, Tianhao Li, Tianyi Tang, Wenbiao Yin, Xingzhang Ren, Xinyu Wang, Xinyu Zhang, Xuancheng Ren, Yang Fan, Yang Su, Yichang Zhang, Yinger Zhang, Yu Wan, Yuqiong Liu, Zekun Wang, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, Zhipeng Zhou, and Zihan Qiu. Qwen3 technical report, 2025. [48] Chenyuan Yang, Zijie Zhao, Zichen Xie, Haoyu Li, and Lingming Zhang. Knighter: Transforming static anal-ysis with llm-synthesized checkers. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 31st Symposium on Operating Sys-tems Principles , SOSP ’25, New York, NY, USA, 2025. Association for Computing Machinery. [49] Chenyuan Yang, Zijie Zhao, and Lingming Zhang. Ker-nelGPT: Enhanced Kernel Fuzzing via Large Language Models , page 560–573. Association for Computing Ma-chinery, New York, NY, USA, 2025. [50] Lunjun Zhang, Arian Hosseini, Hritik Bansal, Mehran Kazemi, Aviral Kumar, and Rishabh Agarwal. Genera-tive verifiers: Reward modeling as next-token prediction. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. [51] Xuandong Zhao, Zhewei Kang, Aosong Feng, Sergey Levine, and Dawn Song. Learning to reason without external rewards, 2025. [52] Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuo-han Li, Dacheng Li, Eric P. Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , NIPS ’23, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2023. Curran Associates Inc. [53] Xiangxin Zhou, Zichen Liu, Anya Sims, Haonan Wang, Tianyu Pang, Chongxuan Li, Liang Wang, Min Lin, and Chao Du. Reinforcing general reasoning without ver-ifiers. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2026. 15