Title: Predicting Acceptance and Review Effort in Human and Agent Pull Requests

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.12057v1

Published Time: Wed, 15 Jul 2026 12:00:00 GMT

Number of Pages: 10

Markdown Content:
# Predicting Acceptance and Review Effort in Human and Agent Pull Requests 

Kartik Ghanshyambhai Pansuriya, Ehsan Ghorbani, Deepak Singh, Eman Abdullah AlOmar 

Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken, New Jersey, USA Email: {kpansuri,eghorban,dsingh12,ealomar}@stevens.edu 

Abstract —Pull requests (PRs) are a central mechanism for reviewing and integrating code changes in modern software repositories. As AI coding agents begin to submit more code changes alongside human developers, maintainers face a new challenge: deciding which PRs are likely to be accepted and which ones may require substantial review effort. This paper studies whether such outcomes can be estimated at the time a PR is opened, before reviewer discussion, CI feedback, or merge decisions are available. Using the AIDev dataset, we construct a leakage-aware pre-diction pipeline for human- and agent-authored PRs. The feature set is limited to submission-time information, including PR text characteristics, metadata, repository context, temporal signals, and lightweight diff statistics. We evaluate classical machine-learning models, including Logistic Regression, Random Forests, Gradient Boosting, Extra Trees, and MLPs, across pooled, human-only, agent-only, and balanced contributor views. Our results show that acceptance prediction is feasible from early signals: tree-based models achieve F 1 scores above 0.95, with textual clarity and metadata among the most influential predictors. Review-effort prediction is more difficult. Comment counts and time-to-merge are only modestly explained by submission-time features, suggesting that reviewer availability, project workflow, and team-specific review practices play a major role. These findings indicate that early PR models can support triage and reviewer prioritization, but should be used as advisory tools rather than automated decision-makers. 

Index Terms —pull requests, software quality, mining software repositories, AI in software engineering 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Pull requests (PRs) are the primary mechanism through which developers propose, review, and integrate changes in collaborative software projects [3], [4], [5], [15], [18], [20]. In platforms such as GitHub, PRs serve not only as code-submission units but also as discussion spaces where maintain-ers evaluate correctness, maintainability, risk, and project fit. Because review capacity is limited, repositories often face long queues, uneven reviewer workloads, and delays in merging useful contributions. Prior work has shown that PR outcomes can often be estimated from submission-time and repository-level signals, including patch size, description quality, contributor history, project context, and social factors [12], [9], [17], [8]. However, most existing PR prediction studies were developed in settings where contributions were assumed to be human-authored. This assumption is becoming less stable as AI coding assistants and autonomous coding agents increasingly generate code changes that enter the same review pipeline as human submissions. Recent empirical evidence suggests that agent-authored PRs may differ from human-authored PRs in structure, review dynamics, and acceptance behavior [11]. AI-generated patches may appear more regular in formatting or style, but still raise concerns about semantic correctness, maintainability, and hid-den behavioral changes. These differences raise an important question: do early PR signals remain useful when the review queue contains both human and agent contributions? This paper investigates two research questions:  

> •

RQ1: How accurately can submission-time PR signals predict whether a PR will be accepted or rejected?  

> •

RQ2: To what extent can PR metadata and code-level features estimate review effort, such as review-comment count and time-to-merge? To answer these questions, we use the AIDev dataset [13], which contains PRs authored by both humans and AI agents. We construct a leakage-aware modeling pipeline that uses only information observable when a PR is opened, enabling a re-alistic early-triage setting. By evaluating pooled, human-only, agent-only, and balanced contributor views, we examine not only predictive performance but also whether model behavior remains stable across contributor types. II. M OTIVATION 

In practice, PR review is not only a technical process but also a resource-allocation problem. Maintainers must decide which submissions deserve immediate attention, which ones are likely to require deeper inspection, and which changes may create avoidable review overhead. These decisions are difficult because many useful signals are incomplete at submission time: reviewers have not yet commented, CI may not have finished, and the final merge decision is unknown. This problem becomes more complex in repositories that receive both human-authored and AI-generated PRs. Agent-authored changes may look well structured on the surface, but reviewers may still inspect them carefully for hidden semantic errors, missing tests, or maintainability risks. As a result, predictors developed for traditional human-only PR settings may not behave the same way in a mixed human–agent review pipeline. The motivation for this study is therefore practical and methodological. Prior work on review latency and PR com-pletion also shows that review outcomes depend on workflow timing, reviewer availability, automation, and project activity patterns, not only on the submitted code itself [21], [14], [19]. arXiv:2607.12057v1 [cs.SE] 13 Jul 2026 Practically, an early prediction model could help maintainers prioritize unclear or potentially costly PRs before review effort accumulates. Methodologically, the mixed human–agent setting allows us to test whether familiar submission-time signals—such as description length, patch size, file churn, and repository context—remain useful when the source of a PR changes. An example of a hybrid review is shown in Figure 1. 

Fig. 1: Example of an agentic PR [1]. Our work addresses this gap through four design choices:  

> •

Submission-time prediction. We predict PR acceptance (RQ1) and review effort (RQ2) using only information available when the PR is opened, before reviewer discus-sion, CI outcomes, or merge decisions can influence the model.  

> •

Mixed human–agent analysis. We evaluate human-authored and agent-authored PRs both together and sepa-rately, allowing us to examine whether predictive patterns remain stable across contributor types.  

> •

Leakage-aware and balanced evaluation. We explicitly remove post-review artifacts from the feature matrix and use balanced contributor views to reduce the risk that results are driven only by the dominant PR source.  

> •

Effort-aware modeling. In addition to acceptance, we model review effort using comment count and time-to-merge, treating these as operational proxies for reviewer workload. This framing positions early PR prediction as a triage-support problem rather than an automated decision-making task. The goal is not to replace maintainers, but to identify which submissions may deserve earlier attention, additional context, or more careful review in mixed human–AI develop-ment environments. This paper is structured as follows. We start by detailing our methodology in Section III. Then, we evaluate our approach in Section IV. We report in Section VI the threats to our work’s validity. In Section V, we listed the related work, before concluding and describing our future work in Section VII. III. S TUDY DESIGN 

We frame the study as an early-prediction problem over pull requests (PRs). For each PR, the model receives only information that would be visible when the PR is first opened, and it must predict either the final acceptance outcome (RQ1) or a proxy for review effort (RQ2). This setup is intentionally restrictive: it prevents the model from using signals that appear later in the review process and keeps the evaluation close to a real triage scenario. Similar to [18], [11], [10], the experiments are based on the AIDev corpus [13], which contains PR-level metadata, commit-level diffs, review discussions, and repository con-text for both human- and agent-authored contributions. We use the corpus to build a row-per-PR modeling table and then evaluate whether early signals—including PR text, diff structure, repository metadata, and contributor type—support reliable prediction. Figure 2 summarizes the data preparation and feature-construction workflow, while Figure 3 summarizes the experimental views and modeling pipeline. 

A. Objectives and Design Principles 

The study is organized around two prediction tasks. RQ1 

is a binary classification problem: given a PR at submission time, predict whether it will eventually be merged or closed without merge. RQ2 is a regression problem: estimate review effort using measurable proxies, specifically review-comment count and time-to-merge. These tasks are related, but they are not interchangeable. Acceptance is a final repository decision, while review effort reflects the amount of interaction and delay that occurs before that decision is reached. The design follows five principles. First, all predictors must be observable when the PR is opened. Second, review-time and post-review artifacts are excluded from the feature matrix, including review comments, CI outcomes, review decisions, merge timestamps, and later commits. Third, the joined data are manually inspected before modeling to check schema coverage, missing fields, linkage quality, label balance, and extreme values. Fourth, the experiments are evaluated under pooled, human-only, agent-only, and balanced views so that performance is not interpreted only from the dominant contrib-utor group. Fifth, the workflow is made reproducible through deterministic preprocessing, fixed random seeds, cached fea-ture tables, and exported experimental artifacts. 

B. Data Sources and Schema 

The final modeling table is built at the PR level. Each row corresponds to one pull request and is assembled from PR metadata, file-level change records, review-discussion records, and repository information. The main AIDev tables used in the study are:  

> •

pull_requests : PR identifiers, repository identifiers, title and body text, contributor type, state, merge indica-tor, and creation/update timestamps.  

> •

pr_commit_details : file-level change records, in-cluding additions, deletions, modified paths, file status, and the number of files touched by a PR.  

> •

pr_comments / pr_review_comments : discussion and review records used to construct RQ2 targets and to assess coverage. These tables are not used as input features. 2Fig. 2: Data preparation and feature engineering workflow: ingestion of AIDev, curated human PRs, and repository metadata; cleaning and harmonization; reproducible caching; feature extraction; and manual validation.  

> •

repositories : repository-level context, including stars, forks, and primary programming language. Several source tables contain multiple records for the same PR. To avoid duplicating PRs during joining, we aggregate one-to-many tables before merging. For example, file-level changes are summarized into PR-level measures such as total additions, total deletions, churn, file count, and file-type com-position. Review and discussion records are summarized only for target construction and coverage checks. This approach keeps the unit of analysis consistent: one row represents one PR. Contributor labels are retained so that the same modeling pipeline can be evaluated across pooled, human-only, agent-only, and balanced views. 

C. Manual Data Analysis 

Before model training, we manually inspect the joined dataset to identify issues that could distort the experiments. This inspection includes checking table sizes, PR-state labels, missing fields, duplicate identifiers, timestamp consistency, and whether comment records can be reliably linked back to the correct PRs. The goal is to verify that the dataset supports the intended prediction tasks before automated preprocessing begins. The manual review also separates fields that can be used as predictors from fields that should only be used as targets or diagnostics. For example, review comments and merge-related timestamps are useful for defining review effort, but they occur after PR submission and therefore cannot appear in the input feature matrix. When unresolved data limitations remain, such as partial comment coverage or uneven repository representation, we treat them as threats to validity rather than masking them inside preprocessing. 

D. Cleaning and Harmonization 

The raw AIDev tables require several harmonization steps before modeling. We first standardize column names and categorical values across tables. Numeric fields such as ad-ditions, deletions, file counts, stars, and forks are coerced into consistent numeric formats. Timestamp fields are parsed into a common UTC format so that creation-time features and time-to-merge targets can be computed consistently. Duplicate records are removed using stable identifiers such as repository ID, PR ID, and creation timestamp. For one-to-many relationships, including changed files and review comments, records are summarized before joining so that a PR does not appear multiple times in the final dataset. Missing numeric values are handled conservatively. Diff counts are treated as zero only when the missing record indicates no observed change; otherwise, missing values are imputed within the training fold. Missing categorical values are assigned an explicit unknown category. After cleaning, the row-per-PR table is stored in a SQLite cache and mirrored to CSV and Parquet files. These exports make the workflow easier to rerun and allow intermediate data products to be inspected when unexpected model behavior appears. 

E. Feature Engineering (Submission-time) 

The feature set is designed to represent information amaintainer could see when a PR is opened. We do not use deep semantic code analysis in this version of the study. Instead, we focus on lightweight signals that can be extracted consistently across repositories and contributor types. The resulting features fall into four groups. 

PR metadata and text structure. From the title and body, we extract length-based and structure-based indicators, including title length, body length, whether the body is present, whether URLs appear, and whether the description includes fenced code blocks. These variables provide simple proxies for the amount and structure of context supplied by the author. 

Repository and temporal context. We include repository-level attributes such as stars, forks, primary language, and log-transformed popularity measures. We also extract creation-time indicators such as hours of day and days of week. These features do not directly measure PR quality, but they help 3Fig. 3: Experimental design and modeling workflow: construction of pooled, agent-only, human-only, and balanced experimental views; RQ1 acceptance classification; RQ2 review-effort regression; and downstream interpretation and artifact generation. capture the environment in which the PR enters the review queue. 

Diff structure. File-level changes are aggregated into PR-level measures, including lines added, lines deleted, number of files touched, total churn, churn ratio, and file-extension diversity. We also compute coarse file-type mixtures to distin-guish code-heavy, documentation-heavy, test-heavy, and mixed changes. These features approximate the size and spread of a change without relying on project-specific semantic analysis. 

Task-intent tags. Since understanding the intent is crucial [7], [6], we assign a lightweight task label from the PR title and body using keyword rules. The categories include fix ,

feature , refactor , docs , and unknown . These tags are intentionally simple. They provide a coarse indication of PR intent without using reviewer-assigned labels or other post-submission annotations. For RQ2, review-related quantities, such as time-to-merge and comment count, are computed only as target variables. They are not included as predictors. This separation is essen-tial because the purpose of the model is to estimate future review outcomes from information available at the time of submission. 

F. Example of Final Modeling Table 

Table I shows a small excerpt of the final row-per-PR modeling table. The sample includes both human- and agent-authored PRs and illustrates the feature types used in the experiments: text-length indicators, diff-size measures, accep-tance labels, time-to-merge when available, and a lightweight task tag. The table is included to clarify the data format; it is not intended to represent the full distribution of the dataset. TABLE I: Example subset of PRs used in our modeling dataset.                                                                       

> PR ID Author Title Len Body Len LOC+ LOC-#Files Churn Accepted TTM (hrs) Task 86 agent 30 298 12 4316 1.000 0.83 fix 317 agent 35 316 25 10 235 1.000 1.12 feature 873 agent 49 207 72191.000 0.63 refactor 315 human 56 434 18 6424 1.000 3.41 unknown 6196 human 44 35602 115 32 7147 0.000 —feature 8440 human 23 091110 1.000 0.92 docs

G. Targets and Leakage Controls a) RQ1: Acceptance prediction: For RQ1, we define PR acceptance as a binary classification task. A PR is treated as accepted when it is merged into the target branch and rejected when it is closed without merge. The feature matrix is restricted to information that would be available when the PR is opened. Variables that reveal later review activity— including reviewer comments, CI results, later commits, re-view decisions, merge timestamps, and final-state artifacts— are excluded from the predictors. This restriction is central to the study design. The objective is not to explain a decision after the review process has already unfolded, but to test whether an early triage model can provide useful guidance before maintainers spend review effort. 

b) RQ2: Effort estimation: For RQ2, we estimate re-view effort using two observable proxies: review-comment count and time-to-merge. Time-to-merge is computed only for merged PRs, since closed PRs do not have a merge timestamp. Comment count is computed only when discussion or review records can be linked reliably to the corresponding PR. Both quantities are used strictly as targets; they are not included as input features. This task is intentionally harder than RQ1. Acceptance has 4a clear final label, while review effort is influenced by factors that are only partly visible at submission time. A large PR may require little discussion if the change is routine, while a small PR may take longer if it raises design, testing, or correctness concerns. 

H. Experimental Views and Splits 

We evaluate the modeling pipeline under four dataset views. The pooled view includes all PRs and reflects the natural mix-ture of human- and agent-authored submissions. The agent-only view contains only PRs attributed to coding agents, while the human-only view contains only human-authored PRs. The 

balanced view down-samples the larger contributor group so that human and agent PRs are represented equally. These views allow us to examine whether the learned patterns remain stable across contributor types. Strong per-formance in the pooled setting alone could be misleading if it is driven mainly by the dominant contributor group or by repository-specific distributional effects. The separated and balanced views therefore provide a check on whether the results reflect general PR-level signals rather than contributor imbalance. Within each view, we use 5-fold cross-validation. For RQ1, folds are stratified by the merged/closed label to preserve the approximate class distribution. For RQ2, folds are formed over the subset of PRs with the relevant target available: merged PRs for time-to-merge and reliably linked PRs for comment-count prediction. Preprocessing, imputation, and hyperparam-eter selection are performed only on the training portion of each fold, and the held-out fold is used only for evaluation. 

I. Modeling Pipelines 

Both research questions use the same submission-time feature table, but they differ in learning objective. RQ1 is evaluated as a classification task, while RQ2 is evaluated as a regression task. We use classical tabular machine learning models because the feature space is primarily composed of structured metadata, lightweight text indicators, repository attributes, temporal signals, and diff statistics. These models are efficient to train, easier to inspect, and more reproducible than heavier neural approaches, which is important for a triage-support setting. For RQ1, we evaluate five classifiers:  

> •

Logistic Regression (LR) with L2 regularization and standardized numeric features. We use 

class_weight=balanced to reduce sensitivity to the merged/closed label imbalance.  

> •

Random Forest (RF) with 400 trees and depth con-straints, allowing the model to capture nonlinear inter-actions among text, repository, temporal, and diff-level signals.  

> •

Gradient Boosting Classifier (GBC) , which builds an additive ensemble of trees and can capture gradual deci-sion boundaries across feature combinations.  

> •

Extra Trees Classifier (ET) , which introduces ran-domized split selection and provides a complementary ensemble model with a different bias–variance profile.  

> •

Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) with one hidden layer of 128 units, ReLU activation, and early stopping. We include two baselines to contextualize the learned mod-els. The majority baseline always predicts the dominant class in the training fold. The heuristic baseline predicts acceptance using a simple rule based on PR body length and the number of changed files, with thresholds selected inside the training fold. These baselines help distinguish meaningful predictive signal from performance caused by class imbalance or simple threshold effects. For RQ2, we train separate regressors for review-comment count and time-to-merge:  

> •

Random Forest Regressor (RFR) , used to model non-linear relationships between submission-time features and effort outcomes.  

> •

Gradient Boosting Regressor (GBR) , used as a com-plementary ensemble model for skewed and heavy-tailed effort targets. All models are trained through consistent preprocessing pipelines. Scaling is applied only when needed, such as for LR and MLP. Tree-based models use the numeric features directly. Keeping the preprocessing consistent across folds helps ensure that performance differences reflect model behavior rather than differences in data handling. 

J. Hyperparameter Strategy 

Hyperparameter tuning is intentionally bounded so that the experiments remain reproducible and easy to rerun. For tree-based models, we search small grids over the number of estimators, maximum depth, and min_samples_leaf . For the MLP, we tune the hidden-layer size and learning rate within a predefined range and use early stopping to reduce overfitting. Logistic Regression uses fixed L2 regularization and serves as a stable linear reference model. All tuning is performed within the training portion of each fold. For RQ1, the model-selection metric is macro-F1, since both accepted and rejected PRs matter in a triage setting. For RQ2, we tune using R2 and report MAE and 

R2, which together describe prediction error and explained variance. We record fold assignments, random seeds, selected hyperparameters, and exported outputs so that the experiments can be reproduced. 

K. Evaluation Protocol and Metrics 

For RQ1, we report Accuracy, Precision, Recall, F 1, and ROC–AUC. Accuracy and F 1 summarize performance at the selected classification threshold, while ROC–AUC measures how well the model ranks accepted and rejected PRs across thresholds. This distinction is important because the dataset is imbalanced: a model can obtain high F 1 by predicting the dominant merged class frequently, even if its ranking ability is only moderate. 5For RQ2, we report MAE and R2. MAE gives the average prediction error in the original target units, such as comments or hours. R2 summarizes how much variance in the target is explained by the model. For comment-count prediction, we also track target coverage because not every PR has reliably linked review-discussion records. All metrics are computed under 5-fold cross-validation. For RQ1, the folds are stratified by the merged/closed label. For RQ2, evaluation is limited to PRs where the relevant target is available. We report average fold performance and use the same split structure across comparable models. 

1) Statistical Significance Testing: To assess whether model differences are likely to reflect real performance differences rather than fold-specific variation, we compare per-fold scores using paired tests. For RQ1, we compare F 1 and ROC–AUC across models. For RQ2, we compare MAE and R2. Paired tests are appropriate because the models are evaluated on the same fold partitions. The significance threshold is set to α =0.05 .

L. Interpretability and Error Analysis 

We analyze model behavior beyond aggregate metrics. For global interpretability, we compute feature-importance rank-ings from tree-based models and compare the dominant feature families across experimental views. We also compute SHAP values on stratified subsamples to inspect local explanations for selected predictions. For error analysis, we examine high-loss cases, including false positives and false negatives for RQ1 and large resid-uals for RQ2. These cases help identify situations where submission-time features are insufficient. For example, a PR may appear clear and low-risk at submission time but later be rejected because reviewers identify semantic problems, missing tests, or maintainability concerns. Conversely, a PR may appear risky because it touches several files, yet still be accepted quickly if the change is routine within that repository. We also compare error patterns across human- and agent-authored PRs to check whether the same feature families drive predictions for both groups. Finally, we run feature-family ablations by removing text-structure signals, repository context, diff metrics, or task tags and measuring the resulting changes in F 1, AUC, MAE, and R2.

M. Algorithmic Outline 

Algorithm 1 summarizes the full workflow used to construct the modeling table, evaluate each experimental view, and export diagnostic artifacts. The important design choice is that preprocessing, tuning, and evaluation are repeated inside each fold so that held-out data never influences model fitting. 

Algorithm 1 Reproducible Build & Evaluation  

> 1:

Load AIDev tables and normalize identifiers, timestamps, and data types.  

> 2:

Aggregate file-level and discussion-level records into one row per PR.  

> 3:

Build submission-time features and store the cleaned table in SQLite/CSV.  

> 4:

Compute target variables for acceptance, comment count, and time-to-merge.  

> 5:

for view ∈ {Pooled, Agent, Human, Balanced} do  

> 6:

Create 5-fold splits using stratification for RQ1.  

> 7:

for fold = 1 .. 5 do  

> 8:

Fit preprocessing steps only on the training split.  

> 9:

Tune model hyperparameters within the training split.  

> 10:

Evaluate the selected model on the held-out fold.  

> 11:

Store predictions, fold metrics, and diagnostic out-puts.  

> 12:

end for  

> 13:

Aggregate metrics and compute feature-importance summaries.  

> 14:

end for  

> 15:

Run ablation and SHAP analyses on stratified samples. 

N. Reproducibility and Artifacts 

To support reproducibility, the data-processing and mod-eling workflow is kept deterministic. The cleaned row-per-PR table is cached as a SQLite snapshot and mirrored to CSV and Parquet exports. We also preserve fold assignments, random seeds, generated figures, result tables, and notebooks used for the RQ1 and RQ2 experiments. These artifacts allow the experiments to be rerun, intermediate data products to be inspected, and each reported metric to be traced back to its corresponding fold and model configuration. 

O. Scope Note 

RQ1 is fully implemented across all experimental views and produces stable classification results. RQ2 is more lim-ited. Time-to-merge prediction is evaluated on merged PRs, while comment-count prediction depends on whether review-discussion records can be linked reliably. For that reason, we treat comment-count prediction as an approximate indicator of review intensity rather than a complete measure of reviewer workload. This scope distinction is important for interpreting the results. Acceptance is a clear final outcome, but review effort is a noisier socio-technical construct. It depends not only on the submitted patch, but also on reviewer availability, project norms, queue pressure, communication style, and workflow timing. The RQ2 results should therefore be read as an early estimate of effort, not as a full explanation of review workload. IV. E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS 

This section presents the empirical results for the two prediction tasks. RQ1 examines whether information available 6when a PR is opened can distinguish merged PRs from PRs closed without merge. RQ2 examines whether the same submission-time feature set can provide an early estimate of review effort, measured through review-comment count and time-to-merge. All experiments use the cleaned AIDev modeling table described in Section III. Because the goal is early triage, the evaluation excludes information that becomes available only after review begins. The reported results therefore reflect what a model could infer at PR submission time, rather than what could be explained retrospectively after review activity and merge decisions are known. 

A. Experimental Setup 

The same submission-time feature table is used across all experiments. For RQ1, the target is the final PR outcome: merged or closed without merge. For RQ2, the targets are review-comment count and time-to-merge, computed only for PRs where the corresponding target can be measured reliably. For acceptance prediction, we compare Logistic Regres-sion, Random Forest, Gradient Boosting, Extra Trees, and a lightweight MLP. We also include two baselines: a majority-class predictor and a simple heuristic based on PR body length and number of changed files. These baselines are included to determine whether the learned models capture signal beyond class imbalance or simple threshold-based behavior. For review-effort estimation, we use Random Forest and Gradient Boosting regressors. Comment count and time-to-merge are modeled separately because they represent different aspects of reviewer workload. Comment count reflects the amount of discussion around a PR, while time-to-merge also depends on workflow timing, reviewer availability, CI delays, and project-specific processes. All reported results are computed using 5-fold cross-validation. Within each fold, preprocessing, imputation, model fitting, and hyperparameter selection are performed only on the training split. The held-out split is used only for evaluation. This prevents information from the test fold from influencing the model and keeps the evaluation aligned with the leakage-aware design. 

B. RQ1: Predicting Pull Request Acceptance 

RQ1 asks whether submission-time signals are sufficient to predict whether a PR will eventually be merged. This task is useful in a triage setting because maintainers often need to identify which submissions are likely to be routine, which ones may require closer inspection, and which ones appear uncertain before review begins. We train all classifiers on the same feature table and com-pare them against the majority and heuristic baselines. This comparison is important because the dataset is skewed toward merged PRs. In such a setting, high accuracy or F 1 alone can be misleading if a model simply predicts the dominant class. 

a) ROC Curves and Calibration: Figure 4 shows the ROC curves for the main RQ1 classifiers. The tree-based models, particularly RF and GBC, show stronger ranking performance than the majority baseline across most threshold settings. This indicates that acceptance is not captured by a single feature, but by interactions among PR description quality, repository context, temporal signals, and diff structure. The majority baseline remains close to the diagonal, con-firming that it has no meaningful ranking ability even though it performs well under thresholded metrics. Logistic Regression performs worse than the ensemble models in classification metrics, but its probability estimates are less extreme. This makes it a useful calibration reference, even when it is not the strongest classifier by F 1.

b) Decision Patterns: The ROC curves suggest that ensemble models are most effective when identifying lower-risk PRs. These PRs often have enough description context, moderate change size, and repository signals that make the change easier to interpret. More difficult cases arise when surface-level signals conflict with repository-specific context. For example, a PR that touches several files may appear risky from diff statistics alone, even if the change is routine within that project. This pattern shows that acceptance prediction is not merely a patch-size problem. The strongest models appear to benefit from combining multiple submission-time cues rather than relying on any single indicator. 

c) Contributor-Type Observations: Although Figure 4 reports pooled results, we also examine human-only and agent-only views. Agent-authored PRs show slightly stronger separa-bility, likely because their formatting and description patterns are more regular. Human-authored PRs show greater variation in language, structure, and change scope, which makes their outcomes harder to separate with a single decision boundary. Both groups remain predictable from early signals. Agent-authored PRs create different review dynamics, but their presence does not make submission-time prediction infeasible. 

Performance Overview: Table II reports the 5-fold cross-validation results for RQ1. RF, GBC, ET, and MLP form a close performance group, with F 1 scores between 0.957 

and 0.958 . These models outperform the heuristic baseline, showing that the feature set contains useful acceptance signals beyond simple rules based on description length or number of changed files. The majority baseline also achieves a high F 1 score because most PRs in the dataset are merged. However, its AUC of 

0.500 shows that it has no ability to rank accepted and rejected PRs. This contrast is important: the learned models are useful for threshold-based triage, but their moderate AUC values indicate that they should not be treated as perfectly calibrated probability models. 

Balanced Contributor View: To examine contributor-type sensitivity, we repeat RQ1 under a balanced human–agent view. Logistic Regression improves substantially after balanc-ing, while RF remains comparatively stable. This suggests that the linear model is more affected by the original contributor distribution, whereas the tree-based model is more robust to group imbalance. 7Fig. 4: ROC curves for the main RQ1 classifiers. Tree-based ensembles provide stronger ranking performance than the majority baseline, while Logistic Regression offers auseful calibration reference despite weaker threshold-based performance. 

Feature Importance: Figure 5 reports the top Random Forest features for acceptance prediction. Text and metadata variables, especially body length and title length, rank above most raw diff-size measures. This suggests that how a PR is presented at submission time is strongly associated with acceptance. These features should be interpreted as predictive signals, not as causal explanations of reviewer decisions. 

C. RQ2: Estimating Review Effort 

RQ2 evaluates whether submission-time features can esti-mate review effort. We use two targets: review-comment count and time-to-merge. These targets measure related but distinct aspects of review work. Comment count captures discussion intensity, while time-to-merge also reflects process delays, reviewer availability, CI behavior, and repository workflow. This task is expected to be harder than acceptance predic-tion. A small PR may still require substantial discussion if it raises design or correctness questions, while a large PR may be merged quickly if the change follows an established pattern. Review effort is therefore better understood as a socio-technical outcome rather than a property of the patch alone. 

Regression Results: Table IV reports the regression results for the two effort targets. The models capture broad trends, but the explained variance remains limited. For comment-count prediction, the model reaches an MAE of 1.00 and an R2 of 

0.20 , indicating that submission-time features provide some early signal about discussion intensity. Time-to-merge is more difficult: the model obtains an MAE of 24 .00 hours and an 

R2 of 0.12 .The lower performance for time-to-merge is consistent with the nature of the target. Delays can result from reviewer queue length, CI waiting time, team availability, release timing, 

Fig. 5: Top-20 feature importances for PR acceptance using Random Forest. Textual and metadata signals rank above most raw diff-size features. TABLE II: RQ1 results: 5-fold stratified CV performance across models.                                         

> Model Acc. F1Prec. Rec. AUC RF 0.920 0.958 0.921 0.998 0.676
> GBC 0.919 0.958 0.920 0.998 0.675 ET 0.919 0.958 0.919 1.000 0.652 MLP 0.919 0.957 0.919 0.999 0.652 Majority 0.918 0.957 0.918 1.000 0.500 LogReg 0.772 0.866 0.936 0.807 0.617 Heuristic 0.650 0.783 0.908 0.689 0.500

or project-specific review practices. These factors are only weakly captured by the submission-time feature set used in this study. 

Feature-Level Patterns: For RQ2, diff-related variables be-come more prominent than they were in RQ1. Lines added, lines deleted, number of files touched, and churn are more closely tied to review workload than to final acceptance. This pattern is reasonable: larger or more scattered changes usually require more reading, more validation, and more discussion. This differs from the RQ1 results, where text and metadata features are more influential. In practical terms, acceptance appears more closely linked to how a PR is framed and contextualized, while review effort is more closely linked to the amount and spread of change that reviewers must inspect. 

Contributor-Type Patterns: Agent-authored PRs show slightly higher discussion and longer median time-to-merge, consistent with the possibility that reviewers inspect AI-generated code more cautiously. However, prediction errors are comparable between human and agent PRs. Thus, agent-authored PRs differ in review dynamics, but they are not fundamentally less predictable from early signals. The practical implication is that contributor type should be treated as context rather than as a direct quality label. An agent-authored PR may warrant careful inspection, but authorship alone should not determine whether the PR is treated as risky. 

D. Discussion 

The results show that acceptance prediction and review-effort prediction are not equally difficult. For RQ1, tree-based models reach high F 1 scores, which means that many accepted PRs share recognizable submission-time patterns. 8TABLE III: RQ1 balanced contributor view under equal agent– human sampling.          

> Model Accuracy F1AUC LogReg 0.873 0.932 0.571 RF 0.867 0.929 0.609

TABLE IV: RQ2 regression results for review-effort predic-tion.       

> Target MAE R2
> Review comments 1.00 0.20 Time-to-merge (hours) 24.00 0.12

Clearer descriptions, stronger metadata signals, and moderate change scope appear frequently among PRs that are eventually merged. At the same time, the moderate AUC values show that these models are not perfect ranking systems. They are useful for triage, but they should not be used to automatically decide whether a PR should be accepted. RQ2 is more difficult because review effort depends on more than the patch itself. Diff size and churn help estimate broad workload, but they cannot capture reviewer availability, CI delays, project urgency, or team-specific review habits. This explains why the regression models only achieve modest R2

values. The result is still useful: it shows that submission-time features can provide an early workload signal, but richer workflow and social context are needed for stronger effort prediction. The human–agent comparison adds another layer to these findings. Agent-authored PRs tend to receive more discussion and somewhat longer review cycles, which suggests that reviewers may inspect AI-generated code more cautiously. However, prediction errors remain similar across human and agent PRs. This means that agent authorship changes review dynamics, but it does not make early prediction unreliable by itself. Error analysis also shows where early models reach their limit. Some PRs look strong at submission time because they have clear titles, concise descriptions, and small diffs, but are later rejected after reviewers find semantic problems, missing tests, or maintainability concerns. Other PRs look risky because they touch several files or use vague wording, yet are accepted quickly because the change is routine in that repository. These cases show why submission-time models should be used as decision-support tools rather than replace-ments for human review. Overall, the main lesson is that early PR signals are strong enough to support acceptance triage, but not rich enough to fully explain review workload. Future systems should com-bine lightweight submission-time features with semantic code analysis, CI state, reviewer load, and author–reviewer history before making stronger claims about review effort. V. R ELATED WORK 

Dey and Mockus [8] designed the probability that a PR will be accepted within a month after creation using a Random Forest model utilizing 50 predictors. This represents properties of the author, PR, and the project to which PR is submitted. Their results show an AUC-ROC value of 0.94 with all 14 predictors and 0.77 excluding PR properties that change after its creation. Gousios et al. [9] explored how pull-based software development works, first on the GHTorrent corpus and then on a carefully selected sample of 291 projects. Their finding shows that PR model offers fast turnaround, increased opportunities for community engagement and decreased time to incorporate contributions. Jiang et al. [12] proposed an accepted PR prediction approach named XGPredict, which builds an XGBoost classifier based on the training dataset of a project to predict whether PRs will be accepted. Maddila et al. [14] designed an end-to-end service, Nudge, to accelerate overdue pull requests toward completion by reminding the author or the reviewer(s) to engage with their overdue PRs. In a randomized trial involving 147 repositories used at Microsoft, Nudge reduced the PR resolution time by 60% for 8,500 PRs. This was compared to overdue PRs where Nudge did not send notifications. Rahman and Roy [15] analyzed PR discussion texts, project-specific information (e.g., domain, maturity), and developer-specific information (e.g., experience) to generate useful insights. These insights are used to compare successful and unsuccessful PRs. Tsay et al. [17] presented a study on open-source software contributions on GitHub that focuses on evaluating PRs. The authors found that project managers used information signaling both good technical contribution prac-tices for a PR and the strength of the social connection between the submitter and the project manager when evaluating PRs. Wessel et al. [19] examined how projects use GitHub Actions, what the developers discuss about them, and how project activity indicators change after their adoption. Their results indicate that 1,489 out of 5,000 most popular repositories adopt GitHub Actions and that developers frequently ask for help implementing them. Ren et al. [16] conducted an empirical study to propose a comprehensive taxonomy of code review dimensions. Additionally, the authors identified three major limitations of existing automated code review methods: lack of comprehensiveness, incorrectness, and vagueness. The experimental results show that their tool, Hydra-Reviewer, achieves a BLEU score of 8.20, outperforming the state-of-the-art baseline, DeepSeek-V3, which scores 7.85. Watanabe et al. [18] empirically analyzed 567 GitHub PRs generated with Claude Code, an agentic coding tool, across 157 diverse open-source projects. Their findings indicate that 83.8% of these agent-assisted PRs are ultimately accepted and merged by project maintainers, with 54.9% of the merged PRs being inte-grated without additional changes. AlOmar et al. [5] revealed insights into how reviewers make a decision about accepting or rejecting a submitted refactoring request, and what makes such a review challenging. Their main results report the lack of a proper procedure for developers to follow when documenting 9their refactorings for review, and their survey with reviewers has also revealed several difficulties related to understanding the intent of the refactoring. VI. T HREATS TO VALIDITY 

The results are based on the AIDev corpus and may not directly generalize to all open-source or industrial reposito-ries. Review practices vary across projects, languages, gover-nance models, CI pipelines, and maintainer teams. The agent-authored PRs in AIDev also reflect the coding agents and workflows available during the dataset period. As AI coding tools evolve, future agent-authored PRs may have different structure, error patterns, and review dynamics. Broader replica-tion across repositories and newer AI-agent systems is needed before making universal claims. VII. C ONCLUSION 

This work studied whether submission-time signals can pre-dict pull request (PR) acceptance and review effort in a mixed human–LLM contributor setting. Using the AIDev corpus, we built a leakage-aware pipeline that uses only information available when a PR is opened, including metadata, textual clarity proxies, repository context, temporal indicators, and lightweight diff features. The results show that PR acceptance can be predicted reasonably well from early signals. Tree-based models achieve strong F 1 performance, and the most useful predictors are largely tied to PR text, metadata, and basic submission struc-ture. At the same time, the moderate AUC values show that these models are better suited for triage support than for fully automated accept/reject decisions. Review-effort prediction is harder. Diff size, churn, and file count provide some signal, but comment count and time-to-merge are strongly shaped by reviewer availability, CI behavior, project workflow, and team-specific review prac-tices. The human–agent comparison further shows that agent-authored PRs often receive more scrutiny, while still remaining predictable from early features when contributor distributions are balanced. Overall, early PR models can help maintainers prioritize review attention, but they should augment rather than replace human judgment. Future work should improve effort predic-tion by adding semantic code representations, reviewer–author history, CI state, reviewer workload, and broader project-level workflow context. VIII. D ATA AVAILABILITY 

This replication package containing data/scripts is available online [2]. IX. A CKNOWLEDGMENTS 

During the preparation of this work, the authors used the ChatGPT Web interface to improve the language and readability. After using this tool, the authors reviewed and edited the content as needed and take full responsibility for the content of the publication. REFERENCES [1] https://github.com/hmislk/hmis/pull/13085. [2] https://zenodo.org/records/20468479. [3] E. A. AlOmar. Deciphering refactoring branch dynamics in modern code review: An empirical study on qt. Information and Software Technology ,177:107596, 2025. [4] E. A. AlOmar, H. AlRubaye, M. W. Mkaouer, A. Ouni, and M. Kessen-tini. Refactoring practices in the context of modern code review: An industrial case study at xerox. In 2021 IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on Software Engineering: Software Engineering in Practice (ICSE-SEIP) , pages 348–357. IEEE, 2021. [5] E. A. AlOmar, M. Chouchen, M. W. Mkaouer, and A. Ouni. Code review practices for refactoring changes: An empirical study on openstack. In 

Proceedings of the 19th international conference on mining software repositories , pages 689–701, 2022. [6] E. A. AlOmar, M. W. Mkaouer, A. Ouni, and M. Kessentini. On the impact of refactoring on the relationship between quality attributes and design metrics. In 2019 ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement (ESEM) , pages 1– 11. IEEE, 2019. [7] E. A. AlOmar, A. Peruma, M. W. Mkaouer, C. Newman, A. Ouni, and M. Kessentini. How we refactor and how we document it? on the use of supervised machine learning algorithms to classify refactoring documentation. Expert Systems with Applications , 167:114176, 2021. [8] T. Dey and A. Mockus. Which pull requests get accepted and why? a study of popular npm packages. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.01153 , 2020. [9] G. Gousios, M. Pinzger, and A. van Deursen. An exploratory study of the pull-based software development model. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Software Engineering , pages 345–355. ACM, 2014. [10] K. Horikawa, K. Horikawa, Y. Kashiwa, H. Uwano, and H. Iida. Do ai agents really improve code readability? arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.13723 , 2026. [11] K. Horikawa, H. Li, Y. Kashiwa, B. Adams, H. Iida, and A. E. Hassan. Agentic refactoring: An empirical study of ai coding agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.04824 , 2025. [12] J. Jiang, J. Zheng, Y. Yang, L. Zhang, and J. Luo. Predicting accepted pull requests in github. Sci. China Inf. Sci , 64:179105, 2021. [13] H. Li, H. Zhang, and A. E. Hassan. The rise of ai teammates in software engineering (se) 3.0: How autonomous coding agents are reshaping software engineering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.15003 , 2025. [14] C. Maddila, S. S. Upadrasta, C. Bansal, N. Nagappan, G. Gousios, and A. van Deursen. Nudge: Accelerating overdue pull requests towards completion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.12468 , 2020. [15] M. M. Rahman and C. K. Roy. An insight into the pull requests of github. In Proceedings of the 11th working conference on mining software repositories , pages 364–367, 2014. [16] X. Ren, C. Dai, Q. Huang, Y. Wang, C. Liu, and B. Jiang. Hydra-reviewer: A holistic multi-agent system for automatic code review comment generation. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , 2025. [17] J. Tsay, L. Dabbish, and J. Herbsleb. Influence of social and technical factors for evaluating contribution in github. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Software Engineering , pages 356–366. ACM, 2014. [18] M. Watanabe, H. Li, Y. Kashiwa, B. Reid, H. Iida, and A. E. Hassan. On the use of agentic coding: An empirical study of pull requests on github. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology ,2025. [19] M. Wessel, J. Vargovich, M. A. Gerosa, and C. Treude. Github actions: The impact on the pull request process. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.14118 , 2022. [20] M. Wyrich, R. Ghit, T. Haller, and C. Müller. Bots don’t mind waiting, do they? comparing the interaction with automatically and manually created pull requests. In 2021 IEEE/ACM Third International Workshop on Bots in Software Engineering (BotSE) , pages 6–10. IEEE, 2021. [21] Y. Yu, H. Wang, V. Filkov, P. Devanbu, and B. Vasilescu. Wait for it: Determinants of pull request evaluation latency on github. In 2015 IEEE/ACM 12th working conference on mining software repositories ,pages 367–371. IEEE, 2015. 

10